docs/image/normalization.rst, before:

**********************************
Image stretching and normalization
**********************************

The `imageutils.normalization` module provides a framework for transforming values in
images (and more generally any arrays), typically for the purpose of
visualization. Two main types of transformations are provided:

* Normalization to the [0:1] range using lower and upper limits where
  :math:`x` represents the values in the original image:

.. math::

    y = \frac{x - v_{\rm min}}{v_{\rm max} - v_{\rm min}}

* *Stretching* of values in the [0:1] range to the [0:1] range using a linear
  or non-linear function:
  
.. math::

    z = f(y)

In addition, classes are provided in order to identify lower and upper limits
for a dataset based on specific algorithms (such as using percentiles).

Identifying lower and upper limits, as well as re-normalizing, is described in
the `Intervals and Normalization`_ section, while stretching is described in
the `Stretching`_ section.


Intervals and Normalization
===========================

Several classes are provided for determining intervals and for normalizing values
in this interval to the [0:1] range. One of the simplest examples is the
:class:`~imageutils.normalization.MinMaxInterval` which determines the limits of the
values based on the minimum and maximum values in the array. The class is
instantiated with no arguments::


    >>> from imageutils.normalization import MinMaxInterval
    >>> interval = MinMaxInterval()

and the limits can be determined by calling the
:meth:`~imageutils.normalization.MinMaxInterval.get_limits` method, which takes the
array of values::

    >>> interval.get_limits([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    (1, 6)

The ``interval`` instance can also be called like a function to actually
normalize values to the range::

    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    array([ 0. ,  0.4,  0.6,  0.8,  1. ])

Other interval classes include :class:`~imageutils.normalization.ManualInterval`,
:class:`~imageutils.normalization.PercentileInterval`, and
:class:`~imageutils.normalization.AsymmetricPercentileInterval`. For these three,
values in the array can fall outside of the limits given by the interval. A
``clip`` argument is provided to control the behavior of the normalization when
values fall outside the limits::


    >>> from imageutils.normalization import PercentileInterval
    >>> interval = PercentileInterval(50.)
    >>> interval.get_limits([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    (3.0, 5.0)
    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])  # default is clip=True
    array([ 0. ,  0. ,  0.5,  1. ,  1. ])
    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6], clip=False)
    array([-1. ,  0. ,  0.5,  1. ,  1.5])

Stretching
==========

In addition to classes that can scale values to the [0:1] range, a number of
classes are provide to 'stretch' the values using different functions. These
map a [0:1] range onto a transformed [0:1] range. A simple example is the
:class:`~imageutils.normalization.SqrtStretch` class::

    >>> from imageutils.normalization import SqrtStretch
    >>> stretch = SqrtStretch()
    >>> stretch([0., 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.])
    array([ 0.        ,  0.5       ,  0.70710678,  0.8660254 ,  1.        ])

As for the intervals, values outside the [0:1] range can be treated differently
depending on the ``clip`` argument. By default, output values are clipped to
the [0:1] range::


    >>> stretch([-1., 0., 0.5, 1., 1.5])
    array([ 0.       ,  0.        ,  0.70710678,  1.        ,  1.        ])

but this can be disabled::

    >>> stretch([-1., 0., 0.5, 1., 1.5], clip=False)
    array([        nan,  0.        ,  0.70710678,  1.        ,  1.22474487])

.. note:: The stretch functions are similar but not always strictly identical
          to those used in e.g. `DS9 <http://ds9.si.edu/site/Home.html>`_
          (although they should have the same behavior). The equations for the
          DS9 stretches can be found `here <http://ds9.si.edu/ref/how.html>`_
          and can be compared to the equations for our stretches provided in
          the `imageutils.normalization` API section. The main difference between our
          stretches and DS9 is that we have adjusted them so that the [0:1]
          range always maps exactly to the [0:1] range.

Combining transformations
=========================

Any stretches and intervals can be chained by using the ``+`` operator, which
returns a new transformation. For example, to apply normalization based on a
percentile value, followed by a square root stretch, you can do::

    >>> transform = SqrtStretch() + PercentileInterval(90.)
    >>> transform([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    array([ 0.        ,  0.60302269,  0.76870611,  0.90453403,  1.        ])
    
As before, the combined transformation can also accept a ``clip`` argument
(which is `True` by default).

Matplotlib normalization
========================

Matplotlib allows a custom normalization and stretch to be used when showing
data, and requires a :class:`~matplotlib.colors.Normalize` object to be passed
to e.g. :meth:`~matplotlib.axes.Axes.imshow`. The `imageutils.normalization` module
provides a class, :class:`~imageutils.normalization.ImageNormalize`, which wraps the
stretch functions from `Stretching`_ into an object Matplotlib understands. The
:class:`~imageutils.normalization.ImageNormalize` class takes the limits (which you
can determine from the `Intervals and Normalization`_ classes) and the stretch
instance:

.. plot::
   :include-source:
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from imageutils.normalization import SqrtStretch, ImageNormalize

    # Generate test image
    image = np.arange(65536).reshape((256, 256))

    # Create normalizer object
    norm = ImageNormalize(vmin=0., vmax=65536, stretch=SqrtStretch())

    # Make the figure
    fig = plt.figure()
    ax = fig.add_subplot(1,1,1)
    im = ax.imshow(image, norm=norm)
    fig.colorbar(im)

As shown above, the colorbar ticks are automatically adjusted.

Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: imageutils.normalization

Commit message:

Fixes to reflect merging into astropy core

docs/image/normalization.rst, after:

**********************************
Image stretching and normalization
**********************************

The `astropy.image.normalization` module provides a framework for transforming values in
images (and more generally any arrays), typically for the purpose of
visualization. Two main types of transformations are provided:

* Normalization to the [0:1] range using lower and upper limits where
  :math:`x` represents the values in the original image:

.. math::

    y = \frac{x - v_{\rm min}}{v_{\rm max} - v_{\rm min}}

* *Stretching* of values in the [0:1] range to the [0:1] range using a linear
  or non-linear function:
  
.. math::

    z = f(y)

In addition, classes are provided in order to identify lower and upper limits
for a dataset based on specific algorithms (such as using percentiles).

Identifying lower and upper limits, as well as re-normalizing, is described in
the `Intervals and Normalization`_ section, while stretching is described in
the `Stretching`_ section.


Intervals and Normalization
===========================

Several classes are provided for determining intervals and for normalizing values
in this interval to the [0:1] range. One of the simplest examples is the
:class:`~astropy.image.normalization.MinMaxInterval` which determines the limits of the
values based on the minimum and maximum values in the array. The class is
instantiated with no arguments::


    >>> from astropy.image.normalization import MinMaxInterval
    >>> interval = MinMaxInterval()

and the limits can be determined by calling the
:meth:`~astropy.image.normalization.MinMaxInterval.get_limits` method, which takes the
array of values::

    >>> interval.get_limits([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    (1, 6)

The ``interval`` instance can also be called like a function to actually
normalize values to the range::

    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    array([ 0. ,  0.4,  0.6,  0.8,  1. ])

Other interval classes include :class:`~astropy.image.normalization.ManualInterval`,
:class:`~astropy.image.normalization.PercentileInterval`, and
:class:`~astropy.image.normalization.AsymmetricPercentileInterval`. For these three,
values in the array can fall outside of the limits given by the interval. A
``clip`` argument is provided to control the behavior of the normalization when
values fall outside the limits::


    >>> from astropy.image.normalization import PercentileInterval
    >>> interval = PercentileInterval(50.)
    >>> interval.get_limits([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    (3.0, 5.0)
    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])  # default is clip=True
    array([ 0. ,  0. ,  0.5,  1. ,  1. ])
    >>> interval([1, 3, 4, 5, 6], clip=False)
    array([-1. ,  0. ,  0.5,  1. ,  1.5])

Stretching
==========

In addition to classes that can scale values to the [0:1] range, a number of
classes are provide to 'stretch' the values using different functions. These
map a [0:1] range onto a transformed [0:1] range. A simple example is the
:class:`~astropy.image.normalization.SqrtStretch` class::

    >>> from astropy.image.normalization import SqrtStretch
    >>> stretch = SqrtStretch()
    >>> stretch([0., 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.])
    array([ 0.        ,  0.5       ,  0.70710678,  0.8660254 ,  1.        ])

As for the intervals, values outside the [0:1] range can be treated differently
depending on the ``clip`` argument. By default, output values are clipped to
the [0:1] range::


    >>> stretch([-1., 0., 0.5, 1., 1.5])
    array([ 0.       ,  0.        ,  0.70710678,  1.        ,  1.        ])

but this can be disabled::

    >>> stretch([-1., 0., 0.5, 1., 1.5], clip=False)
    array([        nan,  0.        ,  0.70710678,  1.        ,  1.22474487])

.. note:: The stretch functions are similar but not always strictly identical
          to those used in e.g. `DS9 <http://ds9.si.edu/site/Home.html>`_
          (although they should have the same behavior). The equations for the
          DS9 stretches can be found `here <http://ds9.si.edu/ref/how.html>`_
          and can be compared to the equations for our stretches provided in
          the `astropy.image.normalization` API section. The main difference between our
          stretches and DS9 is that we have adjusted them so that the [0:1]
          range always maps exactly to the [0:1] range.

Combining transformations
=========================

Any stretches and intervals can be chained by using the ``+`` operator, which
returns a new transformation. For example, to apply normalization based on a
percentile value, followed by a square root stretch, you can do::

    >>> transform = SqrtStretch() + PercentileInterval(90.)
    >>> transform([1, 3, 4, 5, 6])
    array([ 0.        ,  0.60302269,  0.76870611,  0.90453403,  1.        ])
    
As before, the combined transformation can also accept a ``clip`` argument
(which is `True` by default).

Matplotlib normalization
========================

Matplotlib allows a custom normalization and stretch to be used when showing
data, and requires a :class:`~matplotlib.colors.Normalize` object to be passed
to e.g. :meth:`~matplotlib.axes.Axes.imshow`. The `astropy.image.normalization` module
provides a class, :class:`~astropy.image.normalization.ImageNormalize`, which wraps the
stretch functions from `Stretching`_ into an object Matplotlib understands. The
:class:`~astropy.image.normalization.ImageNormalize` class takes the limits (which you
can determine from the `Intervals and Normalization`_ classes) and the stretch
instance:

.. plot::
   :include-source:
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from astropy.image.normalization import SqrtStretch, ImageNormalize

    # Generate test image
    image = np.arange(65536).reshape((256, 256))

    # Create normalizer object
    norm = ImageNormalize(vmin=0., vmax=65536, stretch=SqrtStretch())

    # Make the figure
    fig = plt.figure()
    ax = fig.add_subplot(1,1,1)
    im = ax.imshow(image, norm=norm)
    fig.colorbar(im)

As shown above, the colorbar ticks are automatically adjusted.

Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: astropy.image.normalization
