docs/wcs/index.rst, before:

.. doctest-skip-all
.. _astropy-wcs:

***************************************
World Coordinate System (`astropy.wcs`)
***************************************

.. _wcslib: http://www.atnf.csiro.au/~mcalabre/WCS/
.. _Paper IV: http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/mcalabre/WCS/index.html
.. _SIP: http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/docs/files/spitzer/shupeADASS.pdf
.. _ds9: http://hea-www.harvard.edu/RD/ds9/

Introduction
============

`astropy.wcs` contains utilities for managing World Coordinate System
(WCS) transformations in FITS files.  These transformations map the
pixel locations in an image to their real-world units, such as their
position on the sky sphere.

It is at its base a wrapper around Mark Calabretta's `wcslib`_, but
also adds support for the Simple Imaging Polynomial (`SIP`_)
convention and table lookup distortions as defined in WCS `Paper IV`_.
Each of these transformations can be used independently or together in
a standard pipeline.

Getting Started
===============

The basic workflow is as follows:

    1. ``from astropy import wcs``

    2. Call the `~astropy.wcs.WCS` constructor with an
       `astropy.io.fits` header and/or hdulist object.

    3. Optionally, if the FITS file uses any deprecated or
       non-standard features, you may need to call one of the
       `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.fix` methods on the object.

    4. Use one of the following transformation methods:

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.all_pix2world`: Perform all three
         transformations from pixel to world coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.wcs_pix2world`: Perform just the core
         WCS transformation from pixel to world coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.all_world2pix`: Perform all three
         transformations from world to pixel coordinates, using an
         iterative method if necessary.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.wcs_world2pix`: Perform just the core
         WCS transformation from world to pixel coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.sip_pix2foc`: Convert from pixel to
         focal plane coordinates using the `SIP`_ polynomial
         coefficients.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.sip_foc2pix`: Convert from focal plane
         to pixel coordinates using the `SIP`_ polynomial
         coefficients.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.p4_pix2foc`: Convert from pixel to
         focal plane coordinates using the table lookup distortion
         method described in `Paper IV`_.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.det2im`: Convert from detector
         coordinates to image coordinates.  Commonly used for narrow
         column correction.

For example, to convert pixel coordinates to world coordinates::

    >>> from astropy.wcs import WCS
    >>> w = WCS('image.fits')
    >>> lon, lat = w.all_pix2world(30, 40, 0)
    >>> print(lon, lat)


Using `astropy.wcs`
===================

Loading WCS information from a FITS file
----------------------------------------

This example loads a FITS file (supplied on the commandline) and uses
the WCS cards in its primary header to transform.

.. literalinclude:: examples/from_file.py
   :language: python

Building a WCS structure programmatically
-----------------------------------------

This example, rather than starting from a FITS header, sets WCS values
programmatically, uses those settings to transform some points, and then
saves those settings to a new FITS header.

.. literalinclude:: examples/programmatic.py
   :language: python

.. _wcslint:

Validating the WCS keywords in a FITS file
------------------------------------------

Astropy includes a commandline tool, ``wcslint`` to check the WCS
keywords in a FITS file::

    > wcslint invalid.fits
    HDU 1:
      WCS key ' ':
        - RADECSYS= 'ICRS ' / Astrometric system
          RADECSYS is non-standard, use RADESYSa.
        - The WCS transformation has more axes (2) than the image it is
          associated with (0)
        - 'celfix' made the change 'PV1_5 : Unrecognized coordinate
          transformation parameter'.

    HDU 2:
      WCS key ' ':
        - The WCS transformation has more axes (3) than the image it is
          associated with (0)
        - 'celfix' made the change 'In CUNIT2 : Mismatched units type
          'length': have 'Hz', want 'm''.
        - 'unitfix' made the change 'Changed units: 'HZ      ' -> 'Hz''.

Bounds checking
---------------

Bounds checking is enabled by default, and any computed world
coordinates outside of [-180°, 180°] for longitude and [-90°, 90°] in
latitude are marked as invalid.  To disable this behavior, use
`astropy.wcs.Wcsprm.bounds_check`.

Supported projections
=====================

As `astropy.wcs` is based on `wcslib`_, it supports the standard
projections defined in the WCS papers.  These projection codes are
specified in the second part of the ``CUNITn`` keywords (accessible
through `Wcsprm.cunit <astropy.wcs.Wcsprm.cunit>`), for example,
``RA-TAN-SIP``.  The supported projection codes are:

- ``AZP``: zenithal/azimuthal perspective
- ``SZP``: slant zenithal perspective
- ``TAN``: gnomonic
- ``STG``: stereographic
- ``SIN``: orthographic/synthesis
- ``ARC``: zenithal/azimuthal equidistant
- ``ZPN``: zenithal/azimuthal polynomial
- ``ZEA``: zenithal/azimuthal equal area
- ``AIR``: Airy's projection
- ``CYP``: cylindrical perspective
- ``CEA``: cylindrical equal area
- ``CAR``: plate carrée
- ``MER``: Mercator's projection
- ``COP``: conic perspective
- ``COE``: conic equal area
- ``COD``: conic equidistant
- ``COO``: conic orthomorphic
- ``SFL``: Sanson-Flamsteed ("global sinusoid")
- ``PAR``: parabolic
- ``MOL``: Mollweide's projection
- ``AIT``: Hammer-Aitoff
- ``BON``: Bonne's projection
- ``PCO``: polyconic
- ``TSC``: tangential spherical cube
- ``CSC``: COBE quadrilateralized spherical cube
- ``QSC``: quadrilateralized spherical cube
- ``HPX``: HEALPix
- ``XPH``: HEALPix polar, aka "butterfly"

Subsetting and Pixel Scales
===========================

WCS objects can be broken apart into their constituent axes using the
`~astropy.wcs.WCS.sub` function.  There is also a `~astropy.wcs.WCS.celestial`
convenience function that will return a WCS object with only the celestial axes
included.

The pixel scales of a celestial image or the pixel dimensions of a non-celestial
image can be extracted with the utility functions
`~astropy.wcs.utils.proj_plane_pixel_scales` and
`~astropy.wcs.utils.non_celestial_pixel_scales`. Likewise, celestial pixel
area can be extracted with the utility function
`~astropy.wcs.utils.proj_plane_pixel_area`.

Matplotlib plots with correct WCS projection
============================================

The `WCSAxes <http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ affiliated package adds the
ability to use the :class:`~astropy.wcs.WCS` to define projections in
Matplotlib. More information on installing and using WCSAxes can be found `here
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`__.

Other information
=================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   relax
   history



See Also
========

- `wcslib`_

Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: astropy.wcs

.. automodapi:: astropy.wcs.utils

Acknowledgments and Licenses
============================

wcslib is licenced under the `GNU Lesser General Public License
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html>`_.

Commit message:

Documentation improvements to astropy.wcs
Based on feedback at "Every Page is Page One" workshop.

docs/wcs/index.rst, after:

.. doctest-skip-all
.. _astropy-wcs:

***************************************
World Coordinate System (`astropy.wcs`)
***************************************

.. _wcslib: http://www.atnf.csiro.au/~mcalabre/WCS/
.. _WCS papers: http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/mcalabre/WCS/index.html
.. _Paper IV: http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/mcalabre/WCS/dcs_20040422.pdf
.. _SIP: http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/docs/files/spitzer/shupeADASS.pdf

Introduction
============

`astropy.wcs` contains utilities for managing World Coordinate System
(WCS) transformations in FITS files.  These transformations map the
pixel locations in an image to their real-world units, such as their
position on the sky sphere.  These transformations can work both
forward (from pixel to sky) and backward (from sky to pixel).

It performs three separate classes of WCS transformations:

- Core WCS, as defined in the `WCS papers`_, based on Mark
  Calabretta's `wcslib`_.
- Simple Imaging Polynomial (`SIP`_) convention.
- table lookup distortions as defined in WCS `Paper IV`_.

Each of these transformations can be used independently or together in
a standard pipeline.

Getting Started
===============

The basic workflow is as follows:

    1. ``from astropy import wcs``

    2. Call the `~astropy.wcs.WCS` constructor with an
       `astropy.io.fits` `~astropy.io.fits.Header` and/or
       `~astropy.io.fits.HDUList` object.

    3. Optionally, if the FITS file uses any deprecated or
       non-standard features, you may need to call one of the
       `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.fix` methods on the object.

    4. Use one of the following transformation methods:

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.all_pix2world`: Perform all three
         transformations (core WCS, SIP and table lookup distortions)
         from pixel to world coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.wcs_pix2world`: Perform just the core
         WCS transformation from pixel to world coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.all_world2pix`: Perform all three
         transformations (core WCS, SIP and table lookup distortions)
         from world to pixel coordinates, using an iterative method if
         necessary.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.wcs_world2pix`: Perform just the core
         WCS transformation from world to pixel coordinates.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.sip_pix2foc`: Convert from pixel to
         focal plane coordinates using the `SIP`_ polynomial
         coefficients.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.sip_foc2pix`: Convert from focal plane
         to pixel coordinates using the `SIP`_ polynomial
         coefficients.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.p4_pix2foc`: Convert from pixel to
         focal plane coordinates using the table lookup distortion
         method described in `Paper IV`_.

       - `~astropy.wcs.wcs.WCS.det2im`: Convert from detector
         coordinates to image coordinates.  Commonly used for narrow
         column correction.

For example, to convert pixel coordinates to world coordinates::

    >>> from astropy.wcs import WCS
    >>> w = WCS('image.fits')
    >>> lon, lat = w.all_pix2world(30, 40, 0)
    >>> print(lon, lat)


Using `astropy.wcs`
===================

Loading WCS information from a FITS file
----------------------------------------

This example loads a FITS file (supplied on the commandline) and uses
the WCS cards in its primary header to transform.

.. literalinclude:: examples/from_file.py
   :language: python

Building a WCS structure programmatically
-----------------------------------------

This example, rather than starting from a FITS header, sets WCS values
programmatically, uses those settings to transform some points, and then
saves those settings to a new FITS header.

.. literalinclude:: examples/programmatic.py
   :language: python

.. note::
    The members of the WCS object correspond roughly to the key/value
    pairs in the FITS header.  However, they are adjusted and
    normalized in a number of ways that make performing the WCS
    transformation easier.  Therefore, they can not be relied upon to
    get the original values in the header.  To build up a FITS header
    directly and specifically, use `astropy.io.fits.Header` directly.

.. _wcslint:

Validating the WCS keywords in a FITS file
------------------------------------------

Astropy includes a commandline tool, ``wcslint`` to check the WCS
keywords in a FITS file::

    > wcslint invalid.fits
    HDU 1:
      WCS key ' ':
        - RADECSYS= 'ICRS ' / Astrometric system
          RADECSYS is non-standard, use RADESYSa.
        - The WCS transformation has more axes (2) than the image it is
          associated with (0)
        - 'celfix' made the change 'PV1_5 : Unrecognized coordinate
          transformation parameter'.

    HDU 2:
      WCS key ' ':
        - The WCS transformation has more axes (3) than the image it is
          associated with (0)
        - 'celfix' made the change 'In CUNIT2 : Mismatched units type
          'length': have 'Hz', want 'm''.
        - 'unitfix' made the change 'Changed units: 'HZ      ' -> 'Hz''.

Bounds checking
---------------

Bounds checking is enabled by default, and any computed world
coordinates outside of [-180°, 180°] for longitude and [-90°, 90°] in
latitude are marked as invalid.  To disable this behavior, use
`astropy.wcs.Wcsprm.bounds_check`.

Supported projections
=====================

As `astropy.wcs` is based on `wcslib`_, it supports the standard
projections defined in the WCS papers.  These projection codes are
specified in the second part of the ``CTYPEn`` keywords (accessible
through `Wcsprm.ctype <astropy.wcs.Wcsprm.ctype>`), for example,
``RA-TAN-SIP``.  The supported projection codes are:

- ``AZP``: zenithal/azimuthal perspective
- ``SZP``: slant zenithal perspective
- ``TAN``: gnomonic
- ``STG``: stereographic
- ``SIN``: orthographic/synthesis
- ``ARC``: zenithal/azimuthal equidistant
- ``ZPN``: zenithal/azimuthal polynomial
- ``ZEA``: zenithal/azimuthal equal area
- ``AIR``: Airy's projection
- ``CYP``: cylindrical perspective
- ``CEA``: cylindrical equal area
- ``CAR``: plate carrée
- ``MER``: Mercator's projection
- ``COP``: conic perspective
- ``COE``: conic equal area
- ``COD``: conic equidistant
- ``COO``: conic orthomorphic
- ``SFL``: Sanson-Flamsteed ("global sinusoid")
- ``PAR``: parabolic
- ``MOL``: Mollweide's projection
- ``AIT``: Hammer-Aitoff
- ``BON``: Bonne's projection
- ``PCO``: polyconic
- ``TSC``: tangential spherical cube
- ``CSC``: COBE quadrilateralized spherical cube
- ``QSC``: quadrilateralized spherical cube
- ``HPX``: HEALPix
- ``XPH``: HEALPix polar, aka "butterfly"

Subsetting and Pixel Scales
===========================

WCS objects can be broken apart into their constituent axes using the
`~astropy.wcs.WCS.sub` function.  There is also a `~astropy.wcs.WCS.celestial`
convenience function that will return a WCS object with only the celestial axes
included.

The pixel scales of a celestial image or the pixel dimensions of a non-celestial
image can be extracted with the utility functions
`~astropy.wcs.utils.proj_plane_pixel_scales` and
`~astropy.wcs.utils.non_celestial_pixel_scales`. Likewise, celestial pixel
area can be extracted with the utility function
`~astropy.wcs.utils.proj_plane_pixel_area`.

Matplotlib plots with correct WCS projection
============================================

The `WCSAxes <http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ affiliated package adds the
ability to use the :class:`~astropy.wcs.WCS` to define projections in
Matplotlib. More information on installing and using WCSAxes can be found `here
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`__.

Other information
=================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   relax
   history

See Also
========

- `wcslib`_

Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: astropy.wcs

.. automodapi:: astropy.wcs.utils

Acknowledgments and Licenses
============================

`wcslib`_ is licenced under the `GNU Lesser General Public License
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html>`_.
