docs/development/ccython.rst, before:

.. _building-c-or-cython-extensions:

======================
C or Cython Extensions
======================

Astropy supports using C extensions for wrapping C libraries and Cython for
speeding up computationally-intensive calculations. Both Cython and C extension
building can be customized using the ``get_extensions`` function of the
``setup_package.py`` file. If defined, this function must return a list of
`distutils.core.Extension` objects. The creation process is left to the
subpackage designer, and can be customized however is relevant for the
extensions in the subpackage.

While C extensions must always be defined through the ``get_extensions``
mechanism, Cython files (ending in ``.pyx``) are automatically located and
loaded in separate extensions if they are not in ``get_extensions``. For
Cython extensions located in this way, headers for numpy C functions are
included in the build, but no other external headers are included. ``.pyx``
files present in the extensions returned by ``get_extensions`` are not
included in the list of extensions automatically generated extensions. Note
that this allows disabling a Cython file by providing an extension that
includes the Cython file, but giving it the special ``name`` 'cython_skip'. Any
extension with this package name will not be built by ``setup.py``.

.. note::

    If an :class:`~distutils.core.Extension` object is provided for Cython
    source files using the ``get_extensions`` mechanism, it is very
    important that the ``.pyx`` files be given as the ``source``, rather than the
    ``.c`` files generated by Cython.

Installing C header files
-------------------------

If your C extension needs to be linked from other third-party C code,
you probably want to install its header files along side the Python module.

    1) Create an ``include`` directory inside of your package for
       all of the header files.

    2) Use the ``get_package_data`` hook in ``setup_package.py`` to
       install those header files.  For example, the `astropy.wcs`
       package has this::

           def get_package_data():
               return {'astropy.wcs': ['include/*.h']}

Preventing importing at build time
----------------------------------

In rare cases, some packages may need to be imported at build time.
Unfortunately, anything that requires a C or Cython extension will fail to
import until the build phase has completed. In this cases, the
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` variable can be used to determine if the package is being
imported as part of the build and choose to not import problematic modules.
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` is inserted into the builtins, and is `True` when inside
of astropy's ``setup.py`` script, and `False` otherwise.

For example, suppose there is a subpackage ``foo`` that needs to
import a module called ``version.py`` at build time in order to set
some version information, and also has a C extension, ``process``,
that will not be available in the source tree.  In this case,
``astropy/foo/__init__.py`` would probably want to check the value of
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` before importing the C extension::

    try:
        from . import process
    except ImportError:
        if not _ASTROPY_SETUP_:
            raise

    from . import version

Commit message:

add Using Numpy C headers section in dev docs

docs/development/ccython.rst, after:

.. _building-c-or-cython-extensions:

======================
C or Cython Extensions
======================

Astropy supports using C extensions for wrapping C libraries and Cython for
speeding up computationally-intensive calculations. Both Cython and C extension
building can be customized using the ``get_extensions`` function of the
``setup_package.py`` file. If defined, this function must return a list of
`distutils.core.Extension` objects. The creation process is left to the
subpackage designer, and can be customized however is relevant for the
extensions in the subpackage.

While C extensions must always be defined through the ``get_extensions``
mechanism, Cython files (ending in ``.pyx``) are automatically located and
loaded in separate extensions if they are not in ``get_extensions``. For
Cython extensions located in this way, headers for numpy C functions are
included in the build, but no other external headers are included. ``.pyx``
files present in the extensions returned by ``get_extensions`` are not
included in the list of extensions automatically generated extensions. Note
that this allows disabling a Cython file by providing an extension that
includes the Cython file, but giving it the special ``name`` 'cython_skip'. Any
extension with this package name will not be built by ``setup.py``.

.. note::

    If an :class:`~distutils.core.Extension` object is provided for Cython
    source files using the ``get_extensions`` mechanism, it is very
    important that the ``.pyx`` files be given as the ``source``, rather than the
    ``.c`` files generated by Cython.

Using Numpy C headers
---------------------

If your C or Cython extensions uses `numpy` at the C level, you probably
need access to the numpy C headers.  A common idiom you can find in the numpy
docs or other examples involves getting the include directory by calling
``numpy.get_include()``.  However, using this in ``setup_package.py`` will *not*
work, because ``setup_package.py`` needs to be able to import even when none of
the dependencies are present.  To work around this need, simply include the
string ``'numpy'`` in the list that is passed to the ``include_dirs`` argument
of `distutils.core.Extension`.  The astropy setup helpers will then use
``numpy.get_include()`` downstream once it is certain that the dependencies
have actually been processed.  For example::

    from distutils.extension import Extension

    def get_extensions():
        return Extension(name='myextension', sources=['myext.pyx'],
                         include_dirs=['numpy'])



Installing C header files
-------------------------

If your C extension needs to be linked from other third-party C code,
you probably want to install its header files along side the Python module.

    1) Create an ``include`` directory inside of your package for
       all of the header files.

    2) Use the ``get_package_data`` hook in ``setup_package.py`` to
       install those header files.  For example, the `astropy.wcs`
       package has this::

           def get_package_data():
               return {'astropy.wcs': ['include/*.h']}

Preventing importing at build time
----------------------------------

In rare cases, some packages may need to be imported at build time.
Unfortunately, anything that requires a C or Cython extension will fail to
import until the build phase has completed. In this cases, the
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` variable can be used to determine if the package is being
imported as part of the build and choose to not import problematic modules.
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` is inserted into the builtins, and is `True` when inside
of astropy's ``setup.py`` script, and `False` otherwise.

For example, suppose there is a subpackage ``foo`` that needs to
import a module called ``version.py`` at build time in order to set
some version information, and also has a C extension, ``process``,
that will not be available in the source tree.  In this case,
``astropy/foo/__init__.py`` would probably want to check the value of
``_ASTROPY_SETUP_`` before importing the C extension::

    try:
        from . import process
    except ImportError:
        if not _ASTROPY_SETUP_:
            raise

    from . import version
