docs/whatsnew/1.0.rst, before:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.0:

==========================
What's New in Astropy 1.0?
==========================

Overview
--------

Astropy 1.0 is a major release that adds significant new functionality since the 0.4.x series of releases.

In particular, coordinate conversions to/from Altitude/Azimuth are now
supported (see `Support for Alt/Az coordinates`_), a new package to help with
data visualization has been added (see :ref:`whatsnew_viz`), and a new package
for common analytic functions is now also included (see
:ref:`whatsnew_analytical_functions`).

The :mod:`astropy.io.ascii` sub-package now includes fast C-based
readers/writers for common formats, and also supports a new ASCII format that
better preserves meta-data (see :ref:`whatsnew_io_ascii`), the modeling package
has been significantly improved and now supports composite models (see
:ref:`whatsnew_modeling`), and the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class can now
include :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` and :class:`~astropy.time.Time`
objects containing arrays (see :ref:`whatsnew_table`).

In addition to these major changes, Astropy 1.0 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the `Full change log`_

About Long-term support
-----------------------

Astropy v1.0 is a long-term support (LTS) release.  This means v1.0 will
be supported with bug fixes for 2 years from its release, rather than 6
months like the non-LTS releases. More details about this, including a
wider rationale for Astropy's version numbering scheme, can be found in
`Astropy Proposal for Enhancement 2  <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE2.rst>`_.

Support for Alt/Az coordinates
------------------------------

The `~astropy.coordinates` package now supports conversion to/from AltAz
coordinates.  This means `~astropy.coordinates` can now be used for planning
observations.  For example::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.time import Time
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz
    >>> greenwich = EarthLocation(lat=51.477*u.deg,lon=0*u.deg)
    >>> albireo = SkyCoord('19h30m43.2805s +27d57m34.8483s')
    >>> altaz = albireo.transform_to(AltAz(location=greenwich, obstime=Time('2014-6-21 0:00')))
    >>> print altaz.alt, altaz.az
    60d32m28.4576s 133d45m36.4967s

For a more detailed outline of this new functionality, see the
:ref:`observing-example` and the `~astropy.coordinates.AltAz` documentation.

To enable this functionality, `~astropy.coordinates` now also contains
the full IAU-sanctioned coordinate transformation stack from ICRS to AltAz.
To view the full set of coordinate frames now available, see the coordinates
:ref:`astropy-coordinates-api`.


New Galactocentric coordinate frame
-----------------------------------

Added a new, customizable :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Galactocentric`
coordinate frame. The other coordinate frames (e.g.,
:class:`~astropy.coordinates.ICRS`, :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Galactic`)
are all Heliocentric (or barycentric). The center of this new coordinate frame
is at the center of the Galaxy, with customizable parameters allowing the user
to specify the distance to the Galactic center (``galcen_distance``), the
ICRS position of the Galactic center (``galcen_ra``, ``galcen_dec``), the
height of the Sun above the Galactic midplane (``z_sun``), and a final roll
angle that allows for specifying the orientation of the z axis (``roll``)::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, Galactocentric
    >>> c = SkyCoord(ra=152.718 * u.degree,
    ...              dec=-11.214 * u.degree,
    ...              distance=21.5 * u.kpc)
    >>> c.transform_to(Galactocentric)
    <SkyCoord (Galactocentric: galcen_distance=8.3 kpc, galcen_ra=266d24m18.36s, galcen_dec=-28d56m10.23s, z_sun=27.0 pc, roll=0.0 deg): (x, y, z) in kpc
        (-13.6512648452, -16.6847348677, 12.4862582821)>
    >>> c.transform_to(Galactocentric(galcen_distance=8*u.kpc, z_sun=15*u.pc))
    <SkyCoord (Galactocentric: galcen_distance=8.0 kpc, galcen_ra=266d24m18.36s, galcen_dec=-28d56m10.23s, z_sun=15.0 pc, roll=0.0 deg): (x, y, z) in kpc
        (-13.368458678, -16.6847348677, 12.466872262)>

.. _whatsnew_viz:

New data visualization subpackage
---------------------------------

The new :ref:`Data Visualization <astropy-visualization>` package is intended
to collect functionality that can be helpful when visualizing data. At the
moment, the main functionality is image normalizing (including both scaling and
stretching) but this will be expanded in future. Included in the image
normalization functionality is the ability to compute interval limits on data,
(such as percentile limits), stretching with non-linear functions (such as
square root or arcsinh functions), and the ability to use custom stretches in
`Matplotlib <http://www.matplotlib.org>`_ that are correctly reflected in the
colorbar:

.. plot::
   :include-source:
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize

    # Generate test image
    image = np.arange(65536).reshape((256, 256))

    # Create normalizer object
    norm = ImageNormalize(vmin=0., vmax=65536, stretch=SqrtStretch())

    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(6,3))
    ax = fig.add_subplot(1,1,1)
    im = ax.imshow(image, norm=norm, origin='lower', aspect='auto')
    fig.colorbar(im)

.. _whatsnew_analytical_functions:

New analytic functions subpackage
---------------------------------

This subpackage provides analytic functions that are commonly used in
astronomy. These already understand `~astropy.units.Quantity`, i.e., they can
handle units of input and output parameters. For instance, to calculate the
blackbody flux for 10000K at 6000 Angstrom::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.analytic_functions import blackbody_lambda, blackbody_nu
    >>> blackbody_lambda(6000 * u.AA, 10000 * u.K)
    <Quantity 15315791.836941158 erg / (Angstrom cm2 s sr)>
    >>> blackbody_nu(6000 * u.AA, 10000 * u.K)
    <Quantity 0.00018391673686797075 erg / (cm2 Hz s sr)

See :ref:`astropy_analytic_functions` for more details.

In future versions of Astropy, the functions in this module might also be
accessible as `~astropy.modeling.Model` classes.

.. _whatsnew_io_ascii:

New ASCII features
------------------

Fast readers/writers for ASCII files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :mod:`astropy.io.ascii` module now includes a significantly faster Cython/C engine
for reading and writing ASCII files.  This is available for the following
formats: ``basic``, ``commented_header``, ``csv``, ``no_header``, ``rdb``, and
``tab``.  On average the new engine is about 4 to 5 times faster than the
corresponding pure-Python implementation, and is often comparable to the speed
of the `pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/>`_ ASCII file
interface (`read_csv
<http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/io.html#io-read-csv-table>`_ and
`to_csv
<http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/io.html#io-store-in-csv>`_).  The
fast reader has parallel processing option that allows harnessing multiple
cores for input parsing to achieve even greater speed gains.

By default, :func:`~astropy.io.ascii.read` and :func:`~astropy.io.ascii.write`
will attempt to use the fast C engine when dealing with compatible formats.
Certain features of the full read / write interface are not available in the
fast version, in which case the pure-Python version will automatically be used.

For full details including extensive performance testing, see :ref:`fast_ascii_io`.

Enhanced CSV format
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the problems when storing a table in an ASCII format is preserving table
meta-data such as comments, keywords and column data types, units, and
descriptions.  Using the newly defined `Enhanced Character Separated Values
format <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE6.rst>`_ it is
now possible to write a table to an ASCII-format file and read it back with no
loss of information.  The ECSV format has been designed to be both
human-readable and compatible with most simple CSV readers.

In the example below we show writing a table that has ``float32`` and ``bool``
types.  This illustrates the simple look of the format which has a few header
lines (starting with ``#``) in `YAML <http://www.yaml.org/>`_ format and then
the data values in CSV format.
::

  >>> t = Table()
  >>> t['x'] = Column([1.0, 2.0], unit='m', dtype='float32')
  >>> t['y'] = Column([False, True], dtype='bool')

  >>> from astropy.extern.six.moves import StringIO
  >>> fh = StringIO()
  >>> t.write(fh, format='ascii.ecsv')  # doctest: +SKIP
  >>> table_string = fh.getvalue()      # doctest: +SKIP
  >>> print(table_string)               # doctest: +SKIP
  # %ECSV 0.9
  # ---
  # columns:
  # - {name: x, unit: m, type: float32}
  # - {name: y, type: bool}
  x y
  1.0 False
  2.0 True

Without the header this table would get read back with different types
(``float64`` and ``string`` respectively) and no unit values.  Instead with
the automatically-detected ECSV we get::

  >>> Table.read(table_string, format='ascii')  # doctest: +SKIP
  <Table masked=False length=2>
     x      y
     m
  float32  bool
  ------- -----
      1.0 False
      2.0  True

Note that using the ECSV reader requires the `PyYAML <http://pyyaml.org>`_
package to be installed.

.. _whatsnew_modeling:

New modeling features
---------------------

New subclasses of `~astropy.modeling.Model` are now a bit easier to define,
requiring less boilerplate code in general.  Now all that is necessary to
define a new model class is an `~astropy.modeling.Model.evaluate` method that
computes the model.  Optionally one can define :ref:`fittable parameters
<modeling-parameters>`, a `~astropy.modeling.FittableModel.fit_deriv`, and/or
an `~astropy.modeling.Model.inverse`.  The new, improved
`~astropy.modeling.custom_model` decorator reduces the boilerplate needed for
many models even more.  See :ref:`modeling-new-classes` for more details.

Array broadcasting has also been improved, enabling a broader range of
possibilities for the values of model parameters and inputs.  Support has also
been improved for :ref:`modeling-model-sets` (previously referred to as
parameter sets) which can be thought of like an array of models of the same
class, each with different sets of parameters, which can be fitted
simultaneously either to the same data, or to different data sets per model.
See :ref:`modeling-instantiating` for more details.

It is now possible to create *compound* models by combining existing models
using the standard arithmetic operators such as ``+`` and ``*``, as well as
functional composition using the ``|`` operator.  This provides a powerful
and flexible new way to create more complex models without having to define
any special classes or functions.  For example::

    >>> from astropy.modeling.models import Gaussian1D
    >>> gaussian1 = Gaussian1D(1, 0, 0.2)
    >>> gaussian2 = Gaussian1D(2.5, 0.5, 0.1)
    >>> sum_of_gaussians = gaussian1 + gaussian2

The resulting model works like any other model, and also works with the
fitting framework.  See the
:ref:`introduction to compound models <compound-models-intro>` and full
:ref:`compound models documentation <compound-models>` for more examples.

.. _whatsnew_table:

New Table features
------------------

.. |Quantity| replace:: :class:`~astropy.units.Quantity`
.. |Time| replace:: :class:`~astropy.time.Time`
.. |SkyCoord| replace:: :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
.. |Table| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.Table`
.. |Column| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.Column`
.. |QTable| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.QTable`

Refactor of table infrastructure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The underlying data container for the Astropy |Table| object has been changed
in Astropy v1.0.  Previously, tables were stored internally as a Numpy structured
array object, with column access being a memory view of the corresponding Numpy
array field.  Starting with this release the fundamental data container is an
ordered dictionary of individual column objects and each |Column| object is the
sole owner of its data.

The biggest impact to users is that operations such as adding or removing
table columns is now significantly faster because there is no structured array
to rebuild each time.

For details please see :ref:`table_implementation_change`.

Support for 'mixin' columns
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Version v1.0 of Astropy introduces a new concept of the "Mixin
Column" in tables which allows integration of appropriate non-|Column| based
class objects within a |Table| object.  These mixin column objects are not
converted in any way but are used natively.

The available built-in mixin column classes are |Quantity|, |SkyCoord|, and
|Time|.  User classes for array-like objects that support the
:ref:`mixin_protocol` can also be used in tables as mixin columns.

.. Warning::

   While the Astropy developers are excited about this new capability and
   intend to improve it, the interface for using mixin columns is not stable at
   this point and it is not recommended for use in production code.

As an example we can create a table and add a time column::

  >>> from astropy.table import Table
  >>> from astropy.time import Time
  >>> t = Table()
  >>> t['index'] = [1, 2]
  >>> t['time'] = Time(['2001-01-02T12:34:56', '2001-02-03T00:01:02'])
  >>> print(t)
  index           time
  ----- -----------------------
      1 2001-01-02T12:34:56.000
      2 2001-02-03T00:01:02.000

The important point here is that the ``time`` column is a bona fide |Time| object::

  >>> t['time']
  <Time object: scale='utc' format='isot' value=['2001-01-02T12:34:56.000' '2001-02-03T00:01:02.000']>
  >>> t['time'].mjd
  array([ 51911.52425926,  51943.00071759])

For all the details, including a new |QTable| class, please see :ref:`mixin_columns`.

Integration with WCSAxes
------------------------

The :class:`~astropy.wcs.WCS` class can now be used as a `Matplotlib
<http://www.matplotlib.org>`_ projection to make plots of images with WCS
coordinates overlaid, making use of the `WCSAxes
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ affiliated package behind the scenes. More
information on using this functionality can be found in the `WCSAxes
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ documentation.

Deprecation and backward-incompatible changes
---------------------------------------------

Astropy is now no longer supported on Python 3.1 and 3.2. Python 3.x users
should use Python 3.3 or 3.4. In addition, support for Numpy 1.5 has been
dropped, and users should make sure they are using Numpy 1.6 or later.

Full change log
---------------

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v1.0, including changes in API,
please see the :ref:`changelog`.

Commit message:

added link to stability doc in LTS description, and clarification of what it means with regard to LTS

docs/whatsnew/1.0.rst, after:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.0:

==========================
What's New in Astropy 1.0?
==========================

Overview
--------

Astropy 1.0 is a major release that adds significant new functionality since the 0.4.x series of releases.

In particular, coordinate conversions to/from Altitude/Azimuth are now
supported (see `Support for Alt/Az coordinates`_), a new package to help with
data visualization has been added (see :ref:`whatsnew_viz`), and a new package
for common analytic functions is now also included (see
:ref:`whatsnew_analytical_functions`).

The :mod:`astropy.io.ascii` sub-package now includes fast C-based
readers/writers for common formats, and also supports a new ASCII format that
better preserves meta-data (see :ref:`whatsnew_io_ascii`), the modeling package
has been significantly improved and now supports composite models (see
:ref:`whatsnew_modeling`), and the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class can now
include :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` and :class:`~astropy.time.Time`
objects containing arrays (see :ref:`whatsnew_table`).

In addition to these major changes, Astropy 1.0 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the `Full change log`_

About Long-term support
-----------------------

Astropy v1.0 is a long-term support (LTS) release.  This means v1.0 will
be supported with bug fixes for 2 years from its release, rather than 6
months like the non-LTS releases. More details about this, including a
wider rationale for Astropy's version numbering scheme, can be found in
`Astropy Proposal for Enhancement 2  <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE2.rst>`_.

Note that different sub-packages in Astropy have different stability levels. See
the :doc:`/stability` page for an overview of the status of major components.
LTS can be expected for anything with green or blue (stable or mature) status on
that page.  For yellow (in development) packages, LTS *may* be provided, but
major changes may prevent backporting of complex changes, particularly if they
are connected to new features.

Support for Alt/Az coordinates
------------------------------

The `~astropy.coordinates` package now supports conversion to/from AltAz
coordinates.  This means `~astropy.coordinates` can now be used for planning
observations.  For example::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.time import Time
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz
    >>> greenwich = EarthLocation(lat=51.477*u.deg,lon=0*u.deg)
    >>> albireo = SkyCoord('19h30m43.2805s +27d57m34.8483s')
    >>> altaz = albireo.transform_to(AltAz(location=greenwich, obstime=Time('2014-6-21 0:00')))
    >>> print altaz.alt, altaz.az
    60d32m28.4576s 133d45m36.4967s

For a more detailed outline of this new functionality, see the
:ref:`observing-example` and the `~astropy.coordinates.AltAz` documentation.

To enable this functionality, `~astropy.coordinates` now also contains
the full IAU-sanctioned coordinate transformation stack from ICRS to AltAz.
To view the full set of coordinate frames now available, see the coordinates
:ref:`astropy-coordinates-api`.


New Galactocentric coordinate frame
-----------------------------------

Added a new, customizable :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Galactocentric`
coordinate frame. The other coordinate frames (e.g.,
:class:`~astropy.coordinates.ICRS`, :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Galactic`)
are all Heliocentric (or barycentric). The center of this new coordinate frame
is at the center of the Galaxy, with customizable parameters allowing the user
to specify the distance to the Galactic center (``galcen_distance``), the
ICRS position of the Galactic center (``galcen_ra``, ``galcen_dec``), the
height of the Sun above the Galactic midplane (``z_sun``), and a final roll
angle that allows for specifying the orientation of the z axis (``roll``)::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, Galactocentric
    >>> c = SkyCoord(ra=152.718 * u.degree,
    ...              dec=-11.214 * u.degree,
    ...              distance=21.5 * u.kpc)
    >>> c.transform_to(Galactocentric)
    <SkyCoord (Galactocentric: galcen_distance=8.3 kpc, galcen_ra=266d24m18.36s, galcen_dec=-28d56m10.23s, z_sun=27.0 pc, roll=0.0 deg): (x, y, z) in kpc
        (-13.6512648452, -16.6847348677, 12.4862582821)>
    >>> c.transform_to(Galactocentric(galcen_distance=8*u.kpc, z_sun=15*u.pc))
    <SkyCoord (Galactocentric: galcen_distance=8.0 kpc, galcen_ra=266d24m18.36s, galcen_dec=-28d56m10.23s, z_sun=15.0 pc, roll=0.0 deg): (x, y, z) in kpc
        (-13.368458678, -16.6847348677, 12.466872262)>

.. _whatsnew_viz:

New data visualization subpackage
---------------------------------

The new :ref:`Data Visualization <astropy-visualization>` package is intended
to collect functionality that can be helpful when visualizing data. At the
moment, the main functionality is image normalizing (including both scaling and
stretching) but this will be expanded in future. Included in the image
normalization functionality is the ability to compute interval limits on data,
(such as percentile limits), stretching with non-linear functions (such as
square root or arcsinh functions), and the ability to use custom stretches in
`Matplotlib <http://www.matplotlib.org>`_ that are correctly reflected in the
colorbar:

.. plot::
   :include-source:
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize

    # Generate test image
    image = np.arange(65536).reshape((256, 256))

    # Create normalizer object
    norm = ImageNormalize(vmin=0., vmax=65536, stretch=SqrtStretch())

    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(6,3))
    ax = fig.add_subplot(1,1,1)
    im = ax.imshow(image, norm=norm, origin='lower', aspect='auto')
    fig.colorbar(im)

.. _whatsnew_analytical_functions:

New analytic functions subpackage
---------------------------------

This subpackage provides analytic functions that are commonly used in
astronomy. These already understand `~astropy.units.Quantity`, i.e., they can
handle units of input and output parameters. For instance, to calculate the
blackbody flux for 10000K at 6000 Angstrom::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.analytic_functions import blackbody_lambda, blackbody_nu
    >>> blackbody_lambda(6000 * u.AA, 10000 * u.K)
    <Quantity 15315791.836941158 erg / (Angstrom cm2 s sr)>
    >>> blackbody_nu(6000 * u.AA, 10000 * u.K)
    <Quantity 0.00018391673686797075 erg / (cm2 Hz s sr)

See :ref:`astropy_analytic_functions` for more details.

In future versions of Astropy, the functions in this module might also be
accessible as `~astropy.modeling.Model` classes.

.. _whatsnew_io_ascii:

New ASCII features
------------------

Fast readers/writers for ASCII files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :mod:`astropy.io.ascii` module now includes a significantly faster Cython/C engine
for reading and writing ASCII files.  This is available for the following
formats: ``basic``, ``commented_header``, ``csv``, ``no_header``, ``rdb``, and
``tab``.  On average the new engine is about 4 to 5 times faster than the
corresponding pure-Python implementation, and is often comparable to the speed
of the `pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/>`_ ASCII file
interface (`read_csv
<http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/io.html#io-read-csv-table>`_ and
`to_csv
<http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/io.html#io-store-in-csv>`_).  The
fast reader has parallel processing option that allows harnessing multiple
cores for input parsing to achieve even greater speed gains.

By default, :func:`~astropy.io.ascii.read` and :func:`~astropy.io.ascii.write`
will attempt to use the fast C engine when dealing with compatible formats.
Certain features of the full read / write interface are not available in the
fast version, in which case the pure-Python version will automatically be used.

For full details including extensive performance testing, see :ref:`fast_ascii_io`.

Enhanced CSV format
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the problems when storing a table in an ASCII format is preserving table
meta-data such as comments, keywords and column data types, units, and
descriptions.  Using the newly defined `Enhanced Character Separated Values
format <https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE6.rst>`_ it is
now possible to write a table to an ASCII-format file and read it back with no
loss of information.  The ECSV format has been designed to be both
human-readable and compatible with most simple CSV readers.

In the example below we show writing a table that has ``float32`` and ``bool``
types.  This illustrates the simple look of the format which has a few header
lines (starting with ``#``) in `YAML <http://www.yaml.org/>`_ format and then
the data values in CSV format.
::

  >>> t = Table()
  >>> t['x'] = Column([1.0, 2.0], unit='m', dtype='float32')
  >>> t['y'] = Column([False, True], dtype='bool')

  >>> from astropy.extern.six.moves import StringIO
  >>> fh = StringIO()
  >>> t.write(fh, format='ascii.ecsv')  # doctest: +SKIP
  >>> table_string = fh.getvalue()      # doctest: +SKIP
  >>> print(table_string)               # doctest: +SKIP
  # %ECSV 0.9
  # ---
  # columns:
  # - {name: x, unit: m, type: float32}
  # - {name: y, type: bool}
  x y
  1.0 False
  2.0 True

Without the header this table would get read back with different types
(``float64`` and ``string`` respectively) and no unit values.  Instead with
the automatically-detected ECSV we get::

  >>> Table.read(table_string, format='ascii')  # doctest: +SKIP
  <Table masked=False length=2>
     x      y
     m
  float32  bool
  ------- -----
      1.0 False
      2.0  True

Note that using the ECSV reader requires the `PyYAML <http://pyyaml.org>`_
package to be installed.

.. _whatsnew_modeling:

New modeling features
---------------------

New subclasses of `~astropy.modeling.Model` are now a bit easier to define,
requiring less boilerplate code in general.  Now all that is necessary to
define a new model class is an `~astropy.modeling.Model.evaluate` method that
computes the model.  Optionally one can define :ref:`fittable parameters
<modeling-parameters>`, a `~astropy.modeling.FittableModel.fit_deriv`, and/or
an `~astropy.modeling.Model.inverse`.  The new, improved
`~astropy.modeling.custom_model` decorator reduces the boilerplate needed for
many models even more.  See :ref:`modeling-new-classes` for more details.

Array broadcasting has also been improved, enabling a broader range of
possibilities for the values of model parameters and inputs.  Support has also
been improved for :ref:`modeling-model-sets` (previously referred to as
parameter sets) which can be thought of like an array of models of the same
class, each with different sets of parameters, which can be fitted
simultaneously either to the same data, or to different data sets per model.
See :ref:`modeling-instantiating` for more details.

It is now possible to create *compound* models by combining existing models
using the standard arithmetic operators such as ``+`` and ``*``, as well as
functional composition using the ``|`` operator.  This provides a powerful
and flexible new way to create more complex models without having to define
any special classes or functions.  For example::

    >>> from astropy.modeling.models import Gaussian1D
    >>> gaussian1 = Gaussian1D(1, 0, 0.2)
    >>> gaussian2 = Gaussian1D(2.5, 0.5, 0.1)
    >>> sum_of_gaussians = gaussian1 + gaussian2

The resulting model works like any other model, and also works with the
fitting framework.  See the
:ref:`introduction to compound models <compound-models-intro>` and full
:ref:`compound models documentation <compound-models>` for more examples.

.. _whatsnew_table:

New Table features
------------------

.. |Quantity| replace:: :class:`~astropy.units.Quantity`
.. |Time| replace:: :class:`~astropy.time.Time`
.. |SkyCoord| replace:: :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
.. |Table| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.Table`
.. |Column| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.Column`
.. |QTable| replace:: :class:`~astropy.table.QTable`

Refactor of table infrastructure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The underlying data container for the Astropy |Table| object has been changed
in Astropy v1.0.  Previously, tables were stored internally as a Numpy structured
array object, with column access being a memory view of the corresponding Numpy
array field.  Starting with this release the fundamental data container is an
ordered dictionary of individual column objects and each |Column| object is the
sole owner of its data.

The biggest impact to users is that operations such as adding or removing
table columns is now significantly faster because there is no structured array
to rebuild each time.

For details please see :ref:`table_implementation_change`.

Support for 'mixin' columns
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Version v1.0 of Astropy introduces a new concept of the "Mixin
Column" in tables which allows integration of appropriate non-|Column| based
class objects within a |Table| object.  These mixin column objects are not
converted in any way but are used natively.

The available built-in mixin column classes are |Quantity|, |SkyCoord|, and
|Time|.  User classes for array-like objects that support the
:ref:`mixin_protocol` can also be used in tables as mixin columns.

.. Warning::

   While the Astropy developers are excited about this new capability and
   intend to improve it, the interface for using mixin columns is not stable at
   this point and it is not recommended for use in production code.

As an example we can create a table and add a time column::

  >>> from astropy.table import Table
  >>> from astropy.time import Time
  >>> t = Table()
  >>> t['index'] = [1, 2]
  >>> t['time'] = Time(['2001-01-02T12:34:56', '2001-02-03T00:01:02'])
  >>> print(t)
  index           time
  ----- -----------------------
      1 2001-01-02T12:34:56.000
      2 2001-02-03T00:01:02.000

The important point here is that the ``time`` column is a bona fide |Time| object::

  >>> t['time']
  <Time object: scale='utc' format='isot' value=['2001-01-02T12:34:56.000' '2001-02-03T00:01:02.000']>
  >>> t['time'].mjd
  array([ 51911.52425926,  51943.00071759])

For all the details, including a new |QTable| class, please see :ref:`mixin_columns`.

Integration with WCSAxes
------------------------

The :class:`~astropy.wcs.WCS` class can now be used as a `Matplotlib
<http://www.matplotlib.org>`_ projection to make plots of images with WCS
coordinates overlaid, making use of the `WCSAxes
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ affiliated package behind the scenes. More
information on using this functionality can be found in the `WCSAxes
<http://wcsaxes.readthedocs.org>`_ documentation.

Deprecation and backward-incompatible changes
---------------------------------------------

Astropy is now no longer supported on Python 3.1 and 3.2. Python 3.x users
should use Python 3.3 or 3.4. In addition, support for Numpy 1.5 has been
dropped, and users should make sure they are using Numpy 1.6 or later.

Full change log
---------------

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v1.0, including changes in API,
please see the :ref:`changelog`.
