docs/whatsnew/1.1.rst, before:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

==========================
What's New in Astropy 1.1?
==========================

Overview
--------

Astropy 1.1 is a major release that adds significant new functionality since
the 1.0.x series of releases.

In particular, this release includes support for supergalactic and ecliptic
coordinates (see :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-coords`), new functions to automatically
determine histogram bins, including the Bayesian blocks algorithm (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-hist`), a new interface to transform between
:class:`~astropy.table.Table` objects and pandas `DataFrame`_ objects (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-pandas`), support for table indexing (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-table-indexing`), support for new units, including
logarithmic units such as magnitudes, dex, and decibels (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-units`), and support for the Planck 2015 cosmology and
significant performance improvements in the cosmology sub-package (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-cosmo`).

In addition to these major changes, Astropy 1.1 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the
:ref:`changelog`. By the numbers:

* 785 issues have been closed since v1.0
* 459 pull requests have been merged since v1.0
* 159 distinct people have contributed code

.. _whatsnew-1.1-coords:

New features in celestial coordinates package
---------------------------------------------

The :ref:`astropy-coordinates` sub-package now includes the following new
coordinate frames:

* de Vaucouleur **Supergalactic coordinates**, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Supergalactic` frame.

* **Ecliptic coordinates**, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.GeocentricTrueEcliptic`,
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.BarycentricTrueEcliptic`, and
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.HeliocentricTrueEcliptic` frames. These
  coordinates are still experimental, and should be used with care. We would
  welcome any testing and feedback regarding the accuracy of these
  transformations from users familiar with these frames.

* **Precessed Geocentric coordinates**, which is based on GCRS, but precessed
  to a requested mean equinox, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.PrecessedGeocentric` frame.

In addition, the sub-package now includes the
:func:`~astropy.coordinates.get_constellation` function and the :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
:meth:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord.get_constellation` method, which can be
used to determine the constellation that a coordinate is in.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-hist:

Algorithms for choosing histogram bins
--------------------------------------

The :ref:`stats` and :ref:`astropy-visualization` sub-packages now include
functions to help automatically select histogram bins, including reference
rules such as `Scott's rule
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histogram#Number_of_bins_and_width>`_ and
`Freedman & Diaconis
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedman%E2%80%93Diaconis_rule>`_'s rule, and
Bayesian models such as `Knuth's rule
<http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0605197>`_ and `Bayesian Blocks
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012arXiv1207.5578S>`_:

.. plot::
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    from astropy.visualization import hist

    # generate some complicated data
    rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    t = np.concatenate([-5 + 1.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(500),
                       -4 + 0.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(2000),
                       -1 + 0.3 * rng.standard_cauchy(500),
                       2 + 0.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(1000),
                       4 + 1.5 * rng.standard_cauchy(1000)])

    # truncate to a reasonable range
    t = t[(t > -15) & (t < 15)]

    # draw histograms with two different bin widths
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10,7))
    hist_kwds1 = dict(histtype='stepfilled', alpha=0.2, normed=True)

    fig.subplots_adjust(left=0.1, right=0.95, bottom=0.15)
    for i, bins in enumerate(['scott', 'freedman', 'knuth', 'blocks']):
        ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,i+1)
        hist(t, bins=bins, ax=ax, histtype='stepfilled',
             alpha=0.4, normed=True)
        ax.set_xlabel('t')
        ax.set_ylabel('P(t)')
        ax.set_title('hist(t, bins="{0}")'.format(bins),
                     fontdict=dict(family='monospace'), size=14)


For more information, see the :ref:`astropy-visualization-hist` section.


New features in table package
-----------------------------

.. _whatsnew-1.1-pandas:

Table interface to Pandas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The `pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/>`__ package is a package for high
performance data analysis of table-like structures that is complementary to
the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class in Astropy.

In order to be able to easily exchange data between the
:class:`~astropy.table.Table` class and the pandas `DataFrame`_ class (the
main data structure in pandas), the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class now
includes two methods, :meth:`~astropy.table.Table.to_pandas` and
:meth:`~astropy.table.Table.from_pandas`.

To demonstrate these, we can create a simple table which we convert to a
pandas `DataFrame`_::

    >>> from astropy.table import Table
    >>> t = Table()
    >>> t['a'] = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    >>> t['b'] = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']
    >>> df = t.to_pandas()
    >>> df
       a  b
    0  1  a
    1  2  b
    2  3  c
    3  4  d
    >>> type(df)
    <class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>

A pandas `DataFrame`_ can also easily be converted to an Astropy
:class:`~astropy.table.Table`::

    >>> t2 = Table.from_pandas(df)
    >>> t2
    <Table length=4>
      a      b
    int64 string8
    ----- -------
        1       a
        2       b
        3       c
        4       d

For more information, see :ref:`pandas`.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-table-indexing:

Table indexing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The table sub-package now supports creation of one or more table indices which
internally sort the rows of the table based on the index column(s).  This
concept is commonly used in database tables to enhance performance and ensure
data integrity.

The astropy implementation of indexing provides methods for creating the index,
accessing rows based on key value or location in the sorted index, and
maintaining the index when the table is updated (for instance by adding a new
data row).

As an example, to create an index on a table and retrieve a value::

   >>> from astropy.table import Table
   >>> t = Table(rows=[('Mary', 48),
                       ('Jim', 37),
                       ('Jane', 26),
                       ('Fred', 50)],
                 names=('name', 'age'))
   >>> t.add_index('name')
   >>> t.loc['Jim']['age']
   37

Note that the table indexing engine is new and is not yet considered stable, so
it is not recommended for use in production code at this time.  For more
information, see :ref:`table-indexing`.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-units:

New Units
---------

The :ref:`astropy-units` sub-package now includes support for logarithmic
units such as magnitudes, decibels, and dex::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> logg = 5. * u.dex(u.cm / u.s**2)
    >>> logg.value
    5.0
    >>> logg.physical
    <Quantity 100000.0 cm / s2>

For more information, see :ref:`logarithmic_units`.

In addition, the following units have been added:

* Furlongs (``imperial.furlong``)
* Mil (``imperial.mil``)
* Stone (``imperial.stone``)
* Earth mass (``units.M_earth``) and Jupiter mass (``units.M_jup``)

Finally, quantity arrays can now be used in Matplotlib, which will recognize
the unit and plot the quantities correctly (see :ref:`plotting-quantities`
for more details on how to enable this).


.. _whatsnew-1.1-cosmo:

Improvements to cosmology sub-package
-------------------------------------

The :ref:`astropy-cosmology` sub-package now includes the Planck 2015
cosmology, and in addition includes significant performance improvements
(20-40x) for distance calculations, for all the cosmologies provided.


Deprecation and backward-incompatible changes
---------------------------------------------

The v1.1.x series of releases will be the last one supporting Python 2.6.
Starting with Astropy v1.2, Python 2.7 or later will be required.


2D Cutout Images
----------------

The `astropy.nddata.utils` module now includes a
`~astropy.nddata.utils.Cutout2D` class to create a postage stamp
cutout image from a 2D array.  Image cutouts can be generated using
either pixel or `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` positions.  The cutout
shapes can be specified in either angular or pixel units.  If an
optional `~astropy.wcs.WCS` object is input, then the
`~astropy.nddata.utils.Cutout2D` object will contain an updated
`~astropy.wcs.WCS` corresponding to the cutout array.

For more information, see :ref:`cutout_images`.


Full change log
---------------

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v1.1, including changes in
API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.

.. _DataFrame: http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/dev/generated/pandas.DataFrame.html

Commit message:

Added mention of WCSLIB 5.x and FITS-formatted time strings

docs/whatsnew/1.1.rst, after:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

==========================
What's New in Astropy 1.1?
==========================

Overview
--------

Astropy 1.1 is a major release that adds significant new functionality since
the 1.0.x series of releases.

In particular, this release includes support for supergalactic and ecliptic
coordinates (see :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-coords`), new functions to automatically
determine histogram bins, including the Bayesian blocks algorithm (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-hist`), a new interface to transform between
:class:`~astropy.table.Table` objects and pandas `DataFrame`_ objects (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-pandas`), support for table indexing (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-table-indexing`), support for new units, including
logarithmic units such as magnitudes, dex, and decibels (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-units`), and support for the Planck 2015 cosmology and
significant performance improvements in the cosmology sub-package (see
:ref:`whatsnew-1.1-cosmo`).

In addition to these major changes, Astropy 1.1 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the
:ref:`changelog`. By the numbers:

* 785 issues have been closed since v1.0
* 459 pull requests have been merged since v1.0
* 159 distinct people have contributed code

.. _whatsnew-1.1-coords:

New features in celestial coordinates package
---------------------------------------------

The :ref:`astropy-coordinates` sub-package now includes the following new
coordinate frames:

* de Vaucouleur **Supergalactic coordinates**, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.Supergalactic` frame.

* **Ecliptic coordinates**, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.GeocentricTrueEcliptic`,
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.BarycentricTrueEcliptic`, and
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.HeliocentricTrueEcliptic` frames. These
  coordinates are still experimental, and should be used with care. We would
  welcome any testing and feedback regarding the accuracy of these
  transformations from users familiar with these frames.

* **Precessed Geocentric coordinates**, which is based on GCRS, but precessed
  to a requested mean equinox, implemented via the
  :class:`~astropy.coordinates.PrecessedGeocentric` frame.

In addition, the sub-package now includes the
:func:`~astropy.coordinates.get_constellation` function and the :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
:meth:`~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord.get_constellation` method, which can be
used to determine the constellation that a coordinate is in.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-hist:

Algorithms for choosing histogram bins
--------------------------------------

The :ref:`stats` and :ref:`astropy-visualization` sub-packages now include
functions to help automatically select histogram bins, including reference
rules such as `Scott's rule
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histogram#Number_of_bins_and_width>`_ and
`Freedman & Diaconis
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedman%E2%80%93Diaconis_rule>`_'s rule, and
Bayesian models such as `Knuth's rule
<http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0605197>`_ and `Bayesian Blocks
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012arXiv1207.5578S>`_:

.. plot::
   :align: center

    import numpy as np
    from astropy.visualization import hist

    # generate some complicated data
    rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    t = np.concatenate([-5 + 1.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(500),
                       -4 + 0.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(2000),
                       -1 + 0.3 * rng.standard_cauchy(500),
                       2 + 0.8 * rng.standard_cauchy(1000),
                       4 + 1.5 * rng.standard_cauchy(1000)])

    # truncate to a reasonable range
    t = t[(t > -15) & (t < 15)]

    # draw histograms with two different bin widths
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10,7))
    hist_kwds1 = dict(histtype='stepfilled', alpha=0.2, normed=True)

    fig.subplots_adjust(left=0.1, right=0.95, bottom=0.15)
    for i, bins in enumerate(['scott', 'freedman', 'knuth', 'blocks']):
        ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,i+1)
        hist(t, bins=bins, ax=ax, histtype='stepfilled',
             alpha=0.4, normed=True)
        ax.set_xlabel('t')
        ax.set_ylabel('P(t)')
        ax.set_title('hist(t, bins="{0}")'.format(bins),
                     fontdict=dict(family='monospace'), size=14)


For more information, see the :ref:`astropy-visualization-hist` section.


New features in table package
-----------------------------

.. _whatsnew-1.1-pandas:

Table interface to Pandas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The `pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/>`__ package is a package for high
performance data analysis of table-like structures that is complementary to
the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class in Astropy.

In order to be able to easily exchange data between the
:class:`~astropy.table.Table` class and the pandas `DataFrame`_ class (the
main data structure in pandas), the :class:`~astropy.table.Table` class now
includes two methods, :meth:`~astropy.table.Table.to_pandas` and
:meth:`~astropy.table.Table.from_pandas`.

To demonstrate these, we can create a simple table which we convert to a
pandas `DataFrame`_::

    >>> from astropy.table import Table
    >>> t = Table()
    >>> t['a'] = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    >>> t['b'] = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']
    >>> df = t.to_pandas()
    >>> df
       a  b
    0  1  a
    1  2  b
    2  3  c
    3  4  d
    >>> type(df)
    <class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>

A pandas `DataFrame`_ can also easily be converted to an Astropy
:class:`~astropy.table.Table`::

    >>> t2 = Table.from_pandas(df)
    >>> t2
    <Table length=4>
      a      b
    int64 string8
    ----- -------
        1       a
        2       b
        3       c
        4       d

For more information, see :ref:`pandas`.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-table-indexing:

Table indexing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The table sub-package now supports creation of one or more table indices which
internally sort the rows of the table based on the index column(s).  This
concept is commonly used in database tables to enhance performance and ensure
data integrity.

The astropy implementation of indexing provides methods for creating the index,
accessing rows based on key value or location in the sorted index, and
maintaining the index when the table is updated (for instance by adding a new
data row).

As an example, to create an index on a table and retrieve a value::

   >>> from astropy.table import Table
   >>> t = Table(rows=[('Mary', 48),
                       ('Jim', 37),
                       ('Jane', 26),
                       ('Fred', 50)],
                 names=('name', 'age'))
   >>> t.add_index('name')
   >>> t.loc['Jim']['age']
   37

Note that the table indexing engine is new and is not yet considered stable, so
it is not recommended for use in production code at this time.  For more
information, see :ref:`table-indexing`.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-units:

New Units
---------

The :ref:`astropy-units` sub-package now includes support for logarithmic
units such as magnitudes, decibels, and dex::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> logg = 5. * u.dex(u.cm / u.s**2)
    >>> logg.value
    5.0
    >>> logg.physical
    <Quantity 100000.0 cm / s2>

For more information, see :ref:`logarithmic_units`.

In addition, the following units have been added:

* Furlongs (``imperial.furlong``)
* Mil (``imperial.mil``)
* Stone (``imperial.stone``)
* Earth mass (``units.M_earth``) and Jupiter mass (``units.M_jup``)

Finally, quantity arrays can now be used in Matplotlib, which will recognize
the unit and plot the quantities correctly (see :ref:`plotting-quantities`
for more details on how to enable this).


.. _whatsnew-1.1-cosmo:

Improvements to cosmology sub-package
-------------------------------------

The :ref:`astropy-cosmology` sub-package now includes the Planck 2015
cosmology, and in addition includes significant performance improvements
(20-40x) for distance calculations, for all the cosmologies provided.


Deprecation and backward-incompatible changes
---------------------------------------------

The v1.1.x series of releases will be the last one supporting Python 2.6.
Starting with Astropy v1.2, Python 2.7 or later will be required.


2D Cutout Images
----------------

The `astropy.nddata.utils` module now includes a
`~astropy.nddata.utils.Cutout2D` class to create a postage stamp
cutout image from a 2D array.  Image cutouts can be generated using
either pixel or `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` positions.  The cutout
shapes can be specified in either angular or pixel units.  If an
optional `~astropy.wcs.WCS` object is input, then the
`~astropy.nddata.utils.Cutout2D` object will contain an updated
`~astropy.wcs.WCS` corresponding to the cutout array.

For more information, see :ref:`cutout_images`.

Other significant changes
-------------------------

The :ref:`astropy-wcs` sub-package now supports (and includes) WCSLIB 5.x,
which implements support for the distortion representations described in
[Paper IV: Representations of distortions in FITS world coordinate
systems](http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/mcalabre/WCS/) by Calabretta et al,
including TPV and SIP. Note that for now, Astropy still uses a custom
implementation of the SIP distortions rather than the ones from WCSLIB, but
we plan to change this over in the future.

The :ref:`astropy-time` sub-package now includes support for time strings
formatted using the FITS convention, e.g. ``'2000-01-02T03:04:05(TDB)'``.

Full change log
---------------

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v1.1, including changes in
API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.

.. _DataFrame: http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/dev/generated/pandas.DataFrame.html
