.. _whatsnew-4.1:

**************************
What's New in Astropy 4.1?
**************************

Overview
========

Astropy 4.1 is a major release that contains bug fixes and new features since
the 4.0.x series of releases.

In particular, this release includes:

* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-spectralcoord`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-fitsdask`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-teme`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-inplace-skycoord`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-coordinate-equality`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-skycoord-stack`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-table-skycoord-crossmatch`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-table-custom-attr`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-time-unix-tai`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-fits-wcs-tab`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-replace-submodels`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-models-units`
* :ref:`whatsnew-4.1-models-serialization`

In addition to these major changes, Astropy v4.0 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the
:ref:`changelog`. By the numbers:

* 211 issues have been closed since v4.0
* 275 pull requests have been merged since v4.0
* 62 distinct people have contributed code to this release, 25 of which are first time contributors to Astropy

.. _whatsnew-4.1-spectralcoord:

A new ``SpectralCoord`` class for representing and transforming spectral quantities
===================================================================================

The :ref:`astropy-coordinates` sub-package now includes a new :class:`~astropy.coordinates.SpectralCoord`
class which can be used to represent spectral coordinates, and transform between
different velocity reference frames. It can be used for simple spectral
conversions::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SpectralCoord, SkyCoord
    >>> sc = SpectralCoord([654.2, 654.4, 654.6] * u.nm)
    >>> sc  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <SpectralCoord [654.2, 654.4, 654.6] nm>
    >>> sc.to(u.micron)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <SpectralCoord [0.6542, 0.6544, 0.6546] micron>
    >>> sc.to(u.eV)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <SpectralCoord [1.89520328, 1.89462406, 1.89404519] eV>
    >>> sc.to(u.THz)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <SpectralCoord [458.25811373, 458.11805929, 457.97809044] THz>

.. testsetup::

    >>> from astropy.coordinates import EarthLocation
    >>> location = EarthLocation(2225015.30883296, -5440016.41799762, -2481631.27428014, unit='m')

It can also hold information about the observer and target::

    >>> from astropy.time import Time
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import EarthLocation
    >>> location = EarthLocation.of_site('ALMA')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> alma = location.get_itrs(obstime=Time('2019-04-24T02:32:10'))
    >>> ttau = SkyCoord('04h21m59.43s +19d32m06.4', frame='icrs',
    ...                 radial_velocity=23.9 * u.km / u.s,
    ...                 distance=144.321 * u.pc)
    >>> sc_ttau = SpectralCoord([200, 250, 300] * u.GHz,
    ...                         observer=alma, target=ttau)  # doctest: +IGNORE_WARNINGS

which then allows for example transforming these spectral values to different
velocity frame, including for example to local standard of rest frames (the
following example uses the Kinematic Local Standard of Rest definition)::

    >>> sc_ttau.with_observer_stationary_relative_to('lsrk')  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +REMOTE_DATA
    <SpectralCoord
      ...
      [200.01903338, 250.02379172, 300.02855007] GHz>

or to the rest frame of the target::

    >>> sc_ttau.with_observer_stationary_relative_to(sc_ttau.target)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +REMOTE_DATA
    <SpectralCoord
      ...
      [200.02737811, 250.03422264, 300.04106717] GHz>

For more information and examples, see :ref:`astropy-spectralcoord`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-fitsdask:

Support for writing Dask arrays to FITS files
=============================================

It is now possible to set the data array for :class:`~astropy.io.fits.PrimaryHDU`
and :class:`~astropy.io.fits.ImageHDU` to a `dask <https://dask.org/>`_ array.
If this is written to disk, the dask array will be computed as it is being
written, which will avoid using excessive memory:

.. doctest-requires:: dask

    >>> import dask.array as da
    >>> array = da.random.random((1000, 1000))
    >>> from astropy.io import fits
    >>> hdu = fits.PrimaryHDU(data=array)
    >>> hdu.writeto('test_dask.fits', overwrite=True)

.. _whatsnew-4.1-teme:

Added True Equator Mean Equinox (TEME) frame for satellite two-line ephemeris data
==================================================================================

The True Equator Mean Equinox (`~astropy.coordinates.TEME`) frame has been added to
the built-in frames within :ref:`astropy.coordinates <astropy-coordinates>`.

For more details, see :ref:`astropy-coordinates-satellites`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-inplace-skycoord:

Support for in-place setting of array-valued ``SkyCoord`` and frame objects
===========================================================================

Coordinate values in a array-valued ``SkyCoord`` object can now be modified
in-place using the standard syntax for setting elements of a numpy array::

  >>> sc1 = SkyCoord([1, 2] * u.deg, [3, 4] * u.deg)
  >>> sc2 = SkyCoord(10 * u.deg, 20 * u.deg)
  >>> sc1[0] = sc2
  >>> sc1
  <SkyCoord (ICRS): (ra, dec) in deg
      [(10., 20.), ( 2.,  4.)]>

For more details, see :ref:`astropy-coordinates-modifying-in-place`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-coordinate-equality:

Change in the definition of equality comparison for coordinate classes
======================================================================

When comparing coordinate ``SkyCoord`` or frame objects using the equality
operators ``==`` or ``!=``, the result is now a boolean scalar or array
corresponding to the equality of the corresponding representation data
(including velocities if defined). The comparison is now done in a strict way
that requires all of the frame attributes and representation types to be
identical, where an exception is raised if that is not the case.

Previous to version 4.1, coordinate equality meant only that the two objects
were the same object.  In other words, comparing two ``SkyCoord`` objects
``sc1 == sc2`` was the same as writing ``sc1 is sc2``. Some astropy tests were
relying on this definition so you should check your package tests as well.

This updated equality operator is mostly useful for writing package tests. For
most science analysis or processing work, you should check that the separation
between the coordinates is below a specified angular distance.

For details see: :ref:`coordinates-skycoord-comparing`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-skycoord-stack:

Support use of ``SkyCoord`` in table ``vstack``, ``dstack``, and ``insert_row``
===============================================================================

``SkyCoord`` mixin columns can now be used in table operations ``vstack``,
``dstack``, and ``insert_row`` (as long as they do not result in missing
values). This new functionality is a direct outcome of the new support for
setting ``SkyCoord`` items in-place.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-table-skycoord-crossmatch:

Support for table cross-match join with ``SkyCoord`` or N-d columns
===================================================================

It is now possible to join two source catalog tables using a cross-match join
on the source coordinates (as ``SkyCoord`` mixin columns) with an angular
separation matching tolerance.  This can greatly simplify combining different
catalogs retrieved from astroquery or elsewhere.

This concept of a "fuzzy" join is also available for columns that represent
N-D cartesian points where the physical separation must be within a specified
threshold. This works with ``Quantity`` mixin columns and normal 1-D or N-D
columns.

In all cases the cross-matching is done efficiently using a KD-Tree algorithm,
and thus requires SciPy to be installed.

These join functions are built-in examples of a more generalized new
functionality in table joining that allows users to create custom fuzzy join
functions.  An example would be to use natural language processing tools to join
on words that are sufficiently similar.

For detais see :ref:`astropy-table-join-functions`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-table-custom-attr:

Support for custom attributes in ``Table`` subclasses
=====================================================

One simple table customization that can be useful is adding new attributes to
the table object. This is easy enough, for example ``t.foo = 'hello'``, but this
attribute will be lost if the table is sliced, copied, pickled, or stored to
FITS or ECSV.  In astropy 4.1 there is now an included mechanism to add custom
attributes which are persistent through all those normal operations.

For details see :ref:`table-custom-attributes`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-time-unix-tai:

Added a new ``Time`` subformat ``unix_tai``
===========================================

A new ``Time`` subformat ``unix_tai`` has been added which is analogous to the
standard ``unix`` time subformat but includes leap-seconds. This value matches
the definition for linux `CLOCK_TAI
<https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/posix-clocks.html>`_.

For recent times (after about 1972) the ``unix_tai`` value will differ from
``unix`` by the cumulative integral number of leap seconds since 1970-01-01 UTC.
There were 8.0 leap seconds in place at that time.

For details see: `~astropy.time.TimeUnixTai`.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-fits-wcs-tab:

Added support for the ``-TAB`` convention in FITS WCS
=====================================================

``astropy.wcs`` is now able to read and interpret WCSs implementing the ``-TAB``
convention as described in ``WCS Paper III``,
Greisen, E. W., Calabretta, M. R., Valdes, F. G., and Allen, S. L., Astronomy & Astrophysics, 446, 747-771, 2006.
Currently there is no support for programmatically constructing such WCSs.

.. _whatsnew-4.1-replace-submodels:

Support for replacing submodels in ``CompoundModel``
====================================================

It is now possible to create a new ``CompoundModel`` by modifying an existing
one with the :meth:`~astropy.modeling.core.CompoundModel.replace_submodel` method. The replacement model can have an
arbitrary number of submodels. The only requirement is that the number of inputs
and outputs must match. The model to be replaced is identified by its name::

    >>> from astropy.modeling import models
    >>> m1 = models.Polynomial2D(2) & models.Polynomial2D(2)
    >>> m2 = models.Rotation2D(21.3) | models.Pix2Sky_TAN()
    >>> m2.name = "Rotate_and_Project"
    >>> model = m1 | m2
    >>> model_subst = models.Shift(1) & models.Shift(2)
    >>> new_model = model.replace_submodel("Rotate_and_Project", model_subst | m2)

.. _whatsnew-4.1-models-units:

Support for units on otherwise unitless models via the ``Model.coerce_units`` method.
=====================================================================================

A new :meth:`~astropy.modeling.core.Model.coerce_units` method provides a way to add input and return units to
a unitless model (e.g.  polynomial) by enclosing it with two :class:`~astropy.modeling.mappings.UnitsMapping`
instances and returning a compound model.

    >>> from astropy.modeling import models
    >>> p = models.Polynomial1D(1, c0=1, c1=0)
    >>> p_with_units = p.coerce_units({'x': u.m}, {'y': u.s})
    >>> p_with_units(2 * u.m)
    <Quantity 1. s>

.. _whatsnew-4.1-models-serialization:

Support for ASDF serialization of models
========================================

All models (excluding model sets) can be written to an ASDF file. Constraints
of type ``fixed`` and ``bounds`` can also be serialized.

Full change log
===============

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v4.1, including changes in
API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.


Contributors to the v4.0 release
================================

The people who have contributed to the code for this release are:

.. hlist::
  :columns: 4

  * Adrian Price-Whelan
  * Albert Y. Shih
  * Alex Conley
  * Anne Archibald
  * Antetokounpo  *
  * Arthur Eigenbrot
  * Benjamin Alan Weaver
  * Benjamin Roulston
  * Brett Morris
  * Brigitta Sipőcz
  * Carl Schaffer  *
  * Chris Osborne  *
  * Chris Simpson  *
  * Clara Brasseur
  * Clare Shanahan
  * Dan Foreman-Mackey
  * Daniel Ruschel Dutra  *
  * David Stansby
  * Derek Homeier
  * Ed Slavich  *
  * Erik Tollerud
  * Erin Allard  *
  * Gabriel Perren  *
  * Hans Moritz Günther
  * James Davies
  * Jan Skowron  *
  * Jerry Ma
  * Juan Luis Cano Rodríguez
  * Julien Woillez
  * Kris Stern
  * Larry Bradley
  * Lauren Glattly
  * Leo Singer
  * M S R Dinesh  *
  * Manodeep Sinha  *
  * Marten van Kerkwijk
  * Max Voronkov  *
  * Maximilian Nöthe
  * Michael Lindner-D'Addario  *
  * Miguel de Val-Borro
  * Mihai Cara
  * Nadia Dencheva
  * Nathanial Hendler  *
  * Neal McBurnett  *
  * Nicholas Earl  *
  * Nick Lloyd  *
  * Nick Murphy
  * Perry Greenfield
  * Peter Cock  *
  * Pey Lian Lim
  * Ricky O'Steen  *
  * Robel Geda  *
  * Shivansh Mishra  *
  * Shreyas Bapat
  * Simon Conseil
  * Stuart Littlefair
  * Stuart Mumford
  * Thomas Robitaille
  * Tim Jenness
  * Tom Aldcroft
  * Tom Donaldson
  * Zlatan Vasović  *

Where a * indicates their first contribution to the core astropy package.
