.. _whatsnew-6.1:

**************************
What's New in Astropy 6.1?
**************************

Overview
========

Astropy 6.1 is a minor release that adds significant new functionality since
the 6.0 release.

In particular, this release includes:

* Upgraded the minimum required version of Python to 3.10

In addition to these major changes, Astropy v6.1 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.
By the numbers:

* X issues have been closed since v6.0
* X pull requests have been merged since v6.0
* X distinct people have contributed code


Minimum Python Version
======================

The minimum required version of Python has been upgraded to 3.10. This is in line with
the `NumPy deprecation policy
<https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0029-deprecation_policy.html>`_.


Order-dependent angular separations now come with warnings
==========================================================

Angular separation between two points depends on the point of view.
For example, during a lunar eclipse and for an observer on the Earth the Sun
and the Moon will be in (more-or-less) opposite directions, but at the same
time for an observer at the Earth-Sun L2 point (where Gaia and James Webb Space
Telescope are) the Sun and the Moon will be (more-or-less) in the same
direction.
The :meth:`~astropy.coordinates.BaseCoordinateFrame.separation` method
automatically converts a coordinate given to it to the frame of the coordinate
it belongs to, so the separation can be different if the coordinates are
swapped.
Such transformations are now accompanied by an appropriate warning::

    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord
    >>> icrs = SkyCoord(0 * u.deg, 0 * u.deg, 10 * u.pc)
    >>> gcrs = SkyCoord(0 * u.deg, 0 * u.deg, 380_000 * u.km, frame="gcrs")
    >>> icrs.separation(gcrs)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +SHOW_WARNINGS
    <Angle 100.67116925 deg>
    NonRotationTransformationWarning: transforming other coordinates from
    <GCRS Frame (obstime=J2000.000, obsgeoloc=(0., 0., 0.) m,
    obsgeovel=(0., 0., 0.) m / s)> to <ICRS Frame>. Angular separation can
    depend on the direction of the transformation.
    >>> gcrs.separation(icrs)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +SHOW_WARNINGS
    <Angle 0.0010732 deg>
    NonRotationTransformationWarning: transforming other coordinates from
    <ICRS Frame> to <GCRS Frame (obstime=J2000.000, obsgeoloc=(0., 0., 0.) m,
    obsgeovel=(0., 0., 0.) m / s)>. Angular separation can depend on the
    direction of the transformation.

The warning is not emitted if the coordinate transformation is a pure rotation
because such transformations do not change the origin of the coordinate frames,
so the angular separation does not depend on the order of the coordinates::

    >>> galactic = SkyCoord(0 * u.deg, 0 * u.deg, 10 * u.pc, frame="galactic")
    >>> icrs.separation(galactic)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <Angle 93.14572374 deg>
    >>> galactic.separation(icrs)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <Angle 93.14572374 deg>

It is possible to suppress the warning::

    >>> icrs.separation(gcrs, origin_mismatch="ignore")  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +SHOW_WARNINGS
    <Angle 100.67116925 deg>

It is also possible to forbid non-rotation transformations::

    >>> icrs.separation(gcrs, origin_mismatch="error")  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    Traceback (most recent call last):
        ...
    astropy.coordinates.errors.NonRotationTransformationError: refusing to
    transform other coordinates from <GCRS Frame (obstime=J2000.000,
    obsgeoloc=(0., 0., 0.) m, obsgeovel=(0., 0., 0.) m / s)> to <ICRS Frame>
    because angular separation can depend on the direction of the transformation

Pure rotations will still succeed::

    >>> galactic.separation(icrs, origin_mismatch="error")  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <Angle 93.14572374 deg>


.. _whatsnew-6.1-ascii-default-int-columns-as-int64:

``io.ascii`` uses 64-integers by default for integer columns
============================================================

:mod:`~astropy.io.ascii` now uses a 64-bit integer field by
default when reading a column of integer numeric data. This changes the default behavior
on Windows and potentially 32-bit architectures. Previously on those platforms, table
columns with any long integers which overflowed the 32-bit integer would be returned
as string columns. The new default behavior is consistent with ``numpy`` v2 and ``pandas``.

.. _whatsnew-6.1-copy-semantics:

Copy semantics
==============

Public APIs that expose a ``copy`` argument and that previously set ``False``
as a default value now use ``None`` instead if ``numpy`` v2 or newer is installed.
This is because in ``numpy`` v2, the meaning of the ``copy`` argument was changed,
with ``copy=False`` now indicating that a copy should never be made, while
``copy=None`` is used for the previous meaning of "avoid a copy if possible".

This includes:
- ``astropy.units.Quantity``
- ``astropy.utils.Masked``
- ``astropy.table.Column``
- ``astropy.time.Time``
- ``astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord``

While this change ensures the default behaviour of astropy has not changed,
code that explicitly passes ``copy=False`` to many of astropy's classes
may need adjustments where the intention was to forbid unnecessary copies
but allow the ones that couldn't be avoided.
For portability across different versions of Numpy, we recommend that these
instances of ``False`` be replaced with a ``COPY_IF_NEEDED`` constant defined
as follow

    COPY_IF_NEEDED = False if np.__version__.startswith("1.") else None


Updates to `~astropy.cosmology`
===============================

|Cosmology| as a :func:`~dataclasses.dataclass`
-----------------------------------------------

The :class:`~astropy.cosmology.Cosmology` class is
now a :func:`~dataclasses.dataclass`. This means that the :mod:`dataclasses` machinery
can be used to work with :class:`~astropy.cosmology.Cosmology` objects. For example::

    >>> from dataclasses import asdict, fields, replace
    >>> from astropy.cosmology import Planck18
    >>> replace(Planck18, name="modified", Ob0=0.05)
    FlatLambdaCDM(name='modified', ..., Ob0=0.05)
    >>> asdict(Planck18)
    {'name': 'Planck18', 'meta': ..., 'H0': <Quantity 67.66 km / (Mpc s)>, ...
    >>> [f.name for f in fields(Planck18)]
    ['name', 'meta', 'H0', 'Om0', 'Ode0', 'Tcmb0', 'Neff', 'm_nu', 'Ob0']

Also, it is now possible to create new :class:`~astropy.cosmology.Cosmology` subclasses
using :func:`~dataclasses.make_dataclass`::

    >>> from dataclasses import make_dataclass, field, fields
    >>> from astropy.cosmology import Cosmology
    >>> NewC = make_dataclass("NewC", [("newfield", float, field(default=None))],
    ...                       bases=(Cosmology,), frozen=True, eq=False)
    >>> [f.name for f in fields(NewC)]
    ['name', 'meta', 'newfield']


Full change log
===============

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v6.0, including changes in
API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.
