.. _whatsnew-7.1:

**************************
What's New in Astropy 7.1?
**************************

Overview
========

Astropy 7.1 is a major release that adds significant new functionality since
the 7.0 release.

In particular, this release includes:

* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-table-spaces`
* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-tdat-reader`
* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-covariance`
* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-pyarrow-csv`
* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-cosmology`
* :ref:`whatsnew-7.1-votable-coosys-to-astropy-frame`
* :ref:`whatsnew_7_1_dataorigin`


In addition to these major changes, Astropy v7.1 includes a large number of
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.
By the numbers:

* X issues have been closed since v7.1
* X pull requests have been merged since v7.1
* X distinct people have contributed code

.. _whatsnew-7.1-table-spaces:

Trailing whitespace in ``Table`` string columns can now be stripped
===================================================================

Strings in FITS binary tables are sometimes padded with trailing whitespace.
It is now possible to remove those when reading a table with
``(Q)Table.read("filename.fits", strip_spaces=True)``. The default behavior is
not changed yet to preserve compatibility with codes that might rely on this,
it will change in the next major version (v8.0).

.. _whatsnew-7.1-tdat-reader:

Reading and writing TDAT files with ``astropy.io.ascii``
========================================================

The TDAT format, specified by https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/software/dbdocs/tdat.html,
is now supported by the Unified File Read/Write Interface.

Note that this format is compatible with ``Table`` objects with integer, float,
and/or string data types, but not ``QTable`` objects or other data types.

.. _whatsnew-7.1-covariance:

Constructing, accessing, and storing covariance matrices for N-dimensional data
===============================================================================

We provide a new utility class that provides basic functionality for covariance
matrices associated `~astropy.nddata.NDData` objects via the new
`~astropy.nddata.Covariance` class.  See the full :ref:`nddata-covariance`
documentation.

.. _whatsnew-7.1-pyarrow-csv:

Fast CSV reader using PyArrow
==============================

We have added a new fast CSV reader that uses the `PyArrow CSV reader
<https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/csv.html>`_ to read CSV files up to 15 times
faster than ``astropy.io.ascii`` fast reader or the ``pandas.csv`` reader. This
is an excellent option for reading large CSV files when speed and memory performance are
important. For details see :ref:`table_io_pyarrow_csv`.

.. _whatsnew-7.1-cosmology:

Cosmology
=========

The :mod:`astropy.cosmology.traits` module hosts various parts of cosmologies, such as the
:class:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.ScaleFactor` or
:class:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.TemperatureCMB`. These :term:`traits <trait type>` can be used to more
easily construct custom cosmologies by combining different components.

As a simple example, the :class:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.TemperatureCMB` trait
provides the ``Tcmb0`` property and
:meth:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.TemperatureCMB.Tcmb` method for computing the
cosmological CMB temperature at specified redshifts. By using this trait, you can add
temperature-related  functionality to your custom cosmology class without having to
implement it from scratch.

Here is an example of how to use the :class:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.ScaleFactor` and
:class:`~astropy.cosmology.traits.TemperatureCMB` traits in a custom cosmology class:

>>> import astropy.units as u
>>> from astropy.cosmology.traits import ScaleFactor, TemperatureCMB
>>> from astropy.cosmology import Cosmology
>>>
>>> class CustomCosmology(Cosmology, ScaleFactor, TemperatureCMB):
...     def __init__(self, H0, Om0, Ode0, Tcmb0=2.725):
...         self.H0 = H0
...         self.Om0 = Om0
...         self.Ode0 = Ode0
...         self.Tcmb0 = u.Quantity(Tcmb0, "K")
...         super().__init__()
...
...     is_flat = False
...     # Additional custom methods and properties can be added here

>>> cosmo = CustomCosmology(H0=70, Om0=0.3, Ode0=0.7)
>>> cosmo.scale_factor(0)
<Quantity 1.>
>>> cosmo.Tcmb(1)
<Quantity 5.45 K>

By combining different traits, you can create fully-featured cosmology classes with
minimal effort.

.. _whatsnew-7.1-votable-coosys-to-astropy-frame:

Get an astropy built-in frame out of a VOTable's coosys element
===============================================================

``CooSys`` VOTable elements now have a method ``to_astropy_frame`` that returns the
corresponding astropy built-in frame, when possible::

    >>> from astropy.io.votable.tree import CooSys
    >>> coosys = CooSys(system="ICRS", epoch="J2020")
    >>> coosys.to_astropy_frame()
    <ICRS Frame>


.. _whatsnew_7_1_dataorigin:

New ``astropy.io.votable.dataorigin`` module
============================================

This new module extracts provenance information from VOTable header. The information is described in
DataOrigin IVOA note: https://www.ivoa.net/documents/DataOrigin/.

DataOrigin includes both the query information (such as publisher, contact, versions, etc.)
and the Dataset origin (such as Creator, bibliographic links, URL, etc.).

This API retrieves Metadata from INFO in VOTAble.

Example of output including DataOrigin:

- VizieR catalogue (CDS): ex: Planck cold clumps survey in the Orion complex (Liu+, 2012)


.. code-block:: python

    >>> from astropy.io.votable import parse
    >>> from astropy.io.votable.dataorigin  import extract_data_origin

    >>> vot = parse("https://vizier.cds.unistra.fr/viz-bin/conesearch/J/ApJS/202/4/clumps?RA=69.36&DEC=16.98&SR=0.5")  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> print(extract_data_origin(vot))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +IGNORE_OUTPUT
    publisher: CDS
    server_software: 7.4.5
    service_protocol: ivo://ivoa.net/std/ConeSearch/v1.03
    request: https://vizier.cds.unistra.fr/viz-bin/conesearch/J/ApJS/202/4/clumps?RA=69.36&DEC=16.98&SR=0.5
    request_date: 2025-03-05T08:48:57
    contact: cds-question@unistra.fr

    ivoid: ivo://cds.vizier/j/apjs/202/4
    citation: doi:10.26093/cds/vizier.22020004
    reference_url: https://cdsarc.cds.unistra.fr/viz-bin/cat/J/ApJS/202/4
    rights_uri: https://cds.unistra.fr/vizier-org/licences_vizier.html
    creator: Liu T.
    editor: Astrophysical Journal Supplement (AAS)
    cites: bibcode:2012ApJS..202....4L
    original_date: 2012
    publication_date: 2017-06-29

- GAVO: ex: CALIFA Cubes

.. code-block:: python

    >>> vot = parse("https://dc.g-vo.org/califa/q3/cubesearch/form?__nevow_form__=genForm&target_name=2MASXJ09065870&MAXREC=100&_FORMAT=VOTable&submit=Go")  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> print(extract_data_origin(vot))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +IGNORE_OUTPUT
    publisher: The GAVO DC team
    server_software: DaCHS/2.10 twistedWeb/22.4.0
    request_date: 2025-03-05T08:40:35Z
    contact: gavo@ari.uni-heidelberg.de

    ivoid: ivo://org.gavo.dc/califa/q3/s,ivo://org.gavo.dc/califa/q3/tables
    citation: http://dc.g-vo.org/tableinfo/califadr3.cubes#ti-citing
    reference_url: http://dc.g-vo.org/tableinfo/califadr3.cubes
    resource_version: 3
    rights:  CALIFA asks you to acknowledge:  "This study uses data provided by the Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area (CALIFA) survey (http://califa.caha.es/)."  "Based on observations collected at the Centro Astronómico Hispano Alemán (CAHA) at Calar Alto, operated jointly by the Max-Planck-Institut fűr Astronomie and the Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía (CSIC)."  and to cite both of :bibcode:`2014A&A...569A...1W` and :bibcode:`2012A&A...538A...8S`
    creator: Sánchez, F.,The CALIFA collaboration


Full change log
===============

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v7.1, including changes in
API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.
