docs/coordinates/observing-example.rst, before:

.. _observing-example:

Example: Observation Planning
-----------------------------

This example outlines a common use case for coordinate transformations:
observability curves to assist planning or executing an observing run.
This serves to demonstrate typical usage of `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
and the transformation framework.

Let's suppose you are planning to visit picturesque
`Bear Mountain State Park in New York, USA <https://www.google.com/maps/place/Bear+Mountain+State+Park/@41.288417,-74.003729,11z>`_.
You're bringing your telescope with you (of course), and someone told you M33 is
a great target to observe there.  You happen to know you're free at 11:00 pm
local time, and you want to know if it will be up. Astropy can answer that.
In the example below, we make a `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` to look up
the coordinates of M33 online, and then transform to horizontal coordinates
(`~astropy.coordinates.AltAz`) using an `astropy.time.Time` object for when
we're observing and an `~astropy.coordinates.EarthLocation` object for the
park::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.time import Time
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz
    >>> m33 = SkyCoord.from_name('M33')  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    >>> utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    >>> time = Time('2012-7-12 23:00:00') - utcoffset
    >>> m33altaz = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=time,location=bear_mountain))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> "M33's Altitude = {0.alt:.2}".format(m33altaz)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +REMOTE_DATA
    "M33's Altitude = 0.13 deg"

Oops, so low of an altitude indicates M33 is only just rising, so the trees and
mountains will be in the way. You'd better make a plot to see what the night is
going to look like.  We'll do it by airmass, too, because that's a better
measure of telescope observing conditions::

    >>> midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset
    >>> delta_midnight = np.linspace(-2, 7, 100)*u.hour
    >>> m33altazs = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=midnight+delta_midnight, location=bear_mountain))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

.. doctest-requires:: matplotlib

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> plt.plot(delta_midnight, m33altazs.secz)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlim(-2, 7)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylim(1, 4)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylabel('Airmass [Sec(z)]')  # doctest: +SKIP


.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy import units as u
    from astropy.time import Time
    from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz

    #supress the warning about vector transforms so as not to clutter the doc build log
    import warnings
    warnings.filterwarnings('ignore',module='astropy.coordinates.baseframe')

    m33 = SkyCoord.from_name('M33')
    bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset
    delta_midnight = np.linspace(-2, 7, 100)*u.hour
    m33altazs = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=midnight+delta_midnight, location=bear_mountain))

    plt.plot(delta_midnight, m33altazs.secz)
    plt.xlim(-2, 7)
    plt.ylim(1, 4)
    plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')
    plt.ylabel('Airmass [Sec(z)]')



Hmm, looks like you may need to stay up pretty late.  But maybe you're an
early-riser?  Then you need to know when the sun is rising, and when
it will be twilight. We can get the sun's location with
`~astropy.coordinates.get_sun` and then plot the altitude and color-code by
azimuth::

    >>> from astropy.coordinates import get_sun
    >>> delta_midnight = np.linspace(-12, 12, 1000)*u.hour
    >>> times = midnight + delta_midnight
    >>> altazframe = AltAz(obstime=times, location=bear_mountain)
    >>> sunaltazs = get_sun(times).transform_to(altazframe)
    >>> m33altazs = m33.transform_to(altazframe)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

.. doctest-requires:: matplotlib

    >>> plt.plot(delta_midnight, sunaltazs.alt, color='y', label='Sun')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.scatter(delta_midnight, m33altazs.alt, c=m33altazs.az, label='M33', lw=0, s=8)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +SKIP
    >>> plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -0*u.deg, color='0.5', zorder=0)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -18*u.deg, color='k', zorder=0)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.colorbar().set_label('Azimuth [deg]')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.legend(loc='upper left')
    >>> plt.xlim(-12, 12)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xticks(np.arange(13)*2 -12)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylim(0, 90)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylabel('Altitude [deg]')  # doctest: +SKIP


.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy import units as u
    from astropy.time import Time
    from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz, get_sun

    #supress the warning about vector transforms so as not to clutter the doc build log
    import warnings
    warnings.filterwarnings('ignore',module='astropy.coordinates.baseframe')

    m33 = SkyCoord.from_name('M33')
    bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset

    delta_midnight = np.linspace(-12, 12, 1000)*u.hour
    times = midnight + delta_midnight
    altazframe = AltAz(obstime=times, location=bear_mountain)
    sunaltazs = get_sun(times).transform_to(altazframe)
    m33altazs = m33.transform_to(altazframe)

    plt.plot(delta_midnight, sunaltazs.alt, color='y', label='Sun')
    plt.scatter(delta_midnight, m33altazs.alt, c=m33altazs.az, label='M33', lw=0, s=8)
    plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -0*u.deg, color='0.5', zorder=0)
    plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -18*u.deg, color='k', zorder=0)
    plt.colorbar().set_label('Azimuth [deg]')
    plt.legend(loc='upper left')
    plt.xlim(-12, 12)
    plt.xticks(np.arange(13)*2 -12)
    plt.ylim(0, 90)
    plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')
    plt.ylabel('Altitude [deg]')

Now you're fully-equipped with the tools you need to plan your next
observing run... Or have have a proper vacation.  You decide!

Commit message:

switch to explicit coordinates for plot in observing-example

docs/coordinates/observing-example.rst, after:

.. _observing-example:

Example: Observation Planning
-----------------------------

This example outlines a common use case for coordinate transformations:
observability curves to assist planning or executing an observing run.
This serves to demonstrate typical usage of `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`
and the transformation framework.

Let's suppose you are planning to visit picturesque
`Bear Mountain State Park in New York, USA <https://www.google.com/maps/place/Bear+Mountain+State+Park/@41.288417,-74.003729,11z>`_.
You're bringing your telescope with you (of course), and someone told you M33 is
a great target to observe there.  You happen to know you're free at 11:00 pm
local time, and you want to know if it will be up. Astropy can answer that.
In the example below, we make a `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` to look up
the coordinates of M33 online, and then transform to horizontal coordinates
(`~astropy.coordinates.AltAz`) using an `astropy.time.Time` object for when
we're observing and an `~astropy.coordinates.EarthLocation` object for the
park::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy import units as u
    >>> from astropy.time import Time
    >>> from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz
    >>> m33 = SkyCoord.from_name('M33')  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    >>> utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    >>> time = Time('2012-7-12 23:00:00') - utcoffset
    >>> m33altaz = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=time,location=bear_mountain))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> "M33's Altitude = {0.alt:.2}".format(m33altaz)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP +REMOTE_DATA
    "M33's Altitude = 0.13 deg"

Oops, so low of an altitude indicates M33 is only just rising, so the trees and
mountains will be in the way. You'd better make a plot to see what the night is
going to look like.  We'll do it by airmass, too, because that's a better
measure of telescope observing conditions::

    >>> midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset
    >>> delta_midnight = np.linspace(-2, 7, 100)*u.hour
    >>> m33altazs = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=midnight+delta_midnight, location=bear_mountain))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

.. doctest-requires:: matplotlib

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> plt.plot(delta_midnight, m33altazs.secz)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlim(-2, 7)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylim(1, 4)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylabel('Airmass [Sec(z)]')  # doctest: +SKIP


.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy import units as u
    from astropy.time import Time
    from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz

    #supress the warning about vector transforms so as not to clutter the doc build log
    import warnings
    warnings.filterwarnings('ignore',module='astropy.coordinates.baseframe')

    m33 = SkyCoord(ra=23.4621*u.deg, dec=30.6599417*u.deg) # same as SkyCoord.from_name('M33'): use the explicit coordinates to allow building doc plots w/o internet
    bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset
    delta_midnight = np.linspace(-2, 7, 100)*u.hour
    m33altazs = m33.transform_to(AltAz(obstime=midnight+delta_midnight, location=bear_mountain))

    plt.plot(delta_midnight, m33altazs.secz)
    plt.xlim(-2, 7)
    plt.ylim(1, 4)
    plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')
    plt.ylabel('Airmass [Sec(z)]')



Hmm, looks like you may need to stay up pretty late.  But maybe you're an
early-riser?  Then you need to know when the sun is rising, and when
it will be twilight. We can get the sun's location with
`~astropy.coordinates.get_sun` and then plot the altitude and color-code by
azimuth::

    >>> from astropy.coordinates import get_sun
    >>> delta_midnight = np.linspace(-12, 12, 1000)*u.hour
    >>> times = midnight + delta_midnight
    >>> altazframe = AltAz(obstime=times, location=bear_mountain)
    >>> sunaltazs = get_sun(times).transform_to(altazframe)
    >>> m33altazs = m33.transform_to(altazframe)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA

.. doctest-requires:: matplotlib

    >>> plt.plot(delta_midnight, sunaltazs.alt, color='y', label='Sun')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.scatter(delta_midnight, m33altazs.alt, c=m33altazs.az, label='M33', lw=0, s=8)  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA +SKIP
    >>> plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -0*u.deg, color='0.5', zorder=0)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -18*u.deg, color='k', zorder=0)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.colorbar().set_label('Azimuth [deg]')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.legend(loc='upper left')
    >>> plt.xlim(-12, 12)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xticks(np.arange(13)*2 -12)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylim(0, 90)  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.ylabel('Altitude [deg]')  # doctest: +SKIP


.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy import units as u
    from astropy.time import Time
    from astropy.coordinates import SkyCoord, EarthLocation, AltAz, get_sun

    #supress the warning about vector transforms so as not to clutter the doc build log
    import warnings
    warnings.filterwarnings('ignore',module='astropy.coordinates.baseframe')

    m33 = SkyCoord(ra=23.4621*u.deg, dec=30.6599417*u.deg) # same as SkyCoord.from_name('M33'): use the explicit coordinates to allow building doc plots w/o internet
    bear_mountain = EarthLocation(lat=41.3*u.deg, lon=-74*u.deg, height=390*u.m)
    utcoffset = -4*u.hour  # Eastern Daylight Time
    midnight = Time('2012-7-13 00:00:00') - utcoffset

    delta_midnight = np.linspace(-12, 12, 1000)*u.hour
    times = midnight + delta_midnight
    altazframe = AltAz(obstime=times, location=bear_mountain)
    sunaltazs = get_sun(times).transform_to(altazframe)
    m33altazs = m33.transform_to(altazframe)

    plt.plot(delta_midnight, sunaltazs.alt, color='y', label='Sun')
    plt.scatter(delta_midnight, m33altazs.alt, c=m33altazs.az, label='M33', lw=0, s=8)
    plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -0*u.deg, color='0.5', zorder=0)
    plt.fill_between(delta_midnight, 0, 90, sunaltazs.alt < -18*u.deg, color='k', zorder=0)
    plt.colorbar().set_label('Azimuth [deg]')
    plt.legend(loc='upper left')
    plt.xlim(-12, 12)
    plt.xticks(np.arange(13)*2 -12)
    plt.ylim(0, 90)
    plt.xlabel('Hours from EDT Midnight')
    plt.ylabel('Altitude [deg]')

Now you're fully-equipped with the tools you need to plan your next
observing run... Or have have a proper vacation.  You decide!
