docs/nddata/subclassing.rst, before:

Subclassing
===========

TODO: flesh out content.

`~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase`
----------------------------

`~astropy.nddata.NDData`
------------------------

Subclassing `~astropy.nddata.NDUncertainty`
-------------------------------------------

This is done by using classes
to represent the uncertainties of a given type. For example, to set standard
deviation uncertainties on the pixel values, you can do::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy.nddata import NDData, StdDevUncertainty
    >>> array = np.zeros((12, 12, 12))  # a 3-dimensional array with all zeros
    >>> ndd = NDData(array)
    >>> uncertainty = StdDevUncertainty(np.ones((12, 12, 12)) * 0.1)
    >>> ndd_uncertainty = NDData(ndd, uncertainty=uncertainty)
    INFO: Overwriting NDData's current uncertainty being overwritten with specified uncertainty [astropy.nddata.nddata]

New error classes should sub-class from `~astropy.nddata.NDUncertainty`, and
should provide methods with the following API::

   class MyUncertainty(NDUncertainty):

       def propagate_add(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_subtract(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_multiply(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_divide(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

All error sub-classes inherit an attribute ``self.parent_nddata`` that is
automatically set to the parent `~astropy.nddata.NDData` object that they
are attached to. The arguments passed to the error propagation methods are
``other_nddata``, which is the `~astropy.nddata.NDData` object that is being
combined with ``self.parent_nddata``, and ``result_data``, which is a Numpy
array that contains the data array after the arithmetic operation. All these
methods should return an error instance ``result_uncertainty``, and should not
modify ``parent_nddata`` directly. For subtraction and division, the order of
the operations is ``parent_nddata - other_nddata`` and ``parent_nddata /
other_nddata``.

To make it easier and clearer to code up the error propagation, you can use
variables with more explicit names, e.g::

   class MyUncertainty(NDUncertainty):

       def propogate_add(self, other_nddata, result_data):

           left_uncertainty = self.parent.uncertainty.array
           right_uncertainty = other_nddata.uncertainty.array

           ...

Note that the above example assumes that the errors are stored in an ``array``
attribute, but this does not have to be the case.

For an example of a complete implementation, see `~astropy.nddata.StdDevUncertainty`.

Commit message:

Add more information about subclassing in nddata

docs/nddata/subclassing.rst, after:

Subclassing
===========

There are a couple of choices to be made in subclassing from the nddata
package. For the greatest flexibility, subclass from
`~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase`, which places (almost) no restrictions on any of
its attributes. In many cases, subclassing `~astropy.nddata.NDData` will work
instead; it is more straightforward but places some minimal restrictions on
how the data can be represented.

`~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase`
----------------------------

The class `~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase` is a metaclass -- when subclassing it,
all properties of `~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase` except ``uncertainty`` *must*
be overriden in the subclass. For an example of how to do this, see the source
code for `astropy.nddata.NDData`.

Subclassing from `~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase` gives you complete flexibility
in how you implement data storage and the other properties. If your data is
stored in a numpy array (or something that behaves like a numpy array), it may
be more straightforward to subclass `~astropy.nddata.NDData` instead of
`~astropy.nddata.NDDataBase`.

`~astropy.nddata.NDData`
------------------------

This class serves as the base for subclasses that use a numpy array (or
something that presents a numpy-like interface) as the ``data`` attribute.

For an example of a class that includes mixins and subclasses
`~astropy.nddata.NDData` to add additional functionality, see
`~astropy.nddata.NDDataArray`.

Subclassing `~astropy.nddata.NDUncertainty`
-------------------------------------------

This is done by using classes to represent the uncertainties of a given type.
For example, to set standard deviation uncertainties on the pixel values, you
can do::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy.nddata import NDData, StdDevUncertainty
    >>> array = np.zeros((12, 12, 12))  # a 3-dimensional array with all zeros
    >>> ndd = NDData(array)
    >>> uncertainty = StdDevUncertainty(np.ones((12, 12, 12)) * 0.1)
    >>> ndd_uncertainty = NDData(ndd, uncertainty=uncertainty)
    INFO: Overwriting NDData's current uncertainty being overwritten with specified uncertainty [astropy.nddata.nddata]

New error classes should sub-class from `~astropy.nddata.NDUncertainty`, and
should provide methods with the following API::

   class MyUncertainty(NDUncertainty):

       def propagate_add(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_subtract(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_multiply(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

       def propagate_divide(self, other_nddata, result_data):
           ...
           result_uncertainty = MyUncertainty(...)
           return result_uncertainty

All error sub-classes inherit an attribute ``self.parent_nddata`` that is
automatically set to the parent `~astropy.nddata.NDData` object that they
are attached to. The arguments passed to the error propagation methods are
``other_nddata``, which is the `~astropy.nddata.NDData` object that is being
combined with ``self.parent_nddata``, and ``result_data``, which is a Numpy
array that contains the data array after the arithmetic operation. All these
methods should return an error instance ``result_uncertainty``, and should not
modify ``parent_nddata`` directly. For subtraction and division, the order of
the operations is ``parent_nddata - other_nddata`` and ``parent_nddata /
other_nddata``.

To make it easier and clearer to code up the error propagation, you can use
variables with more explicit names, e.g::

   class MyUncertainty(NDUncertainty):

       def propogate_add(self, other_nddata, result_data):

           left_uncertainty = self.parent.uncertainty.array
           right_uncertainty = other_nddata.uncertainty.array

           ...

Note that the above example assumes that the errors are stored in an ``array``
attribute, but this does not have to be the case.

For an example of a complete implementation, see `~astropy.nddata.StdDevUncertainty`.
