docs/io/votable/index.rst, before:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-io-votable:

*******************************************
VOTable XML handling (`astropy.io.votable`)
*******************************************

Introduction
============

The `astropy.io.votable` subpackage converts VOTable XML files to and
from Numpy record arrays.

Getting Started
===============

Reading a VOTable file
----------------------

To read in a VOTable file, pass a file path to
`~astropy.io.votable.parse`::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse
  votable = parse("votable.xml")

``votable`` is a `~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile` object, which
can be used to retrieve and manipulate the data and save it back out
to disk.

VOTable files are made up of nested ``RESOURCE`` elements, each of
which may contain one or more ``TABLE`` elements.  The ``TABLE``
elements contain the arrays of data.

To get at the ``TABLE`` elements, one can write a loop over the
resources in the ``VOTABLE`` file::

  for resource in votable.resources:
    for table in resource.tables:
      # ... do something with the table ...
      pass

However, if the nested structure of the resources is not important,
one can use `~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.iter_tables` to
return a flat list of all tables::

  for table in votable.iter_tables():
    # ... do something with the table ...
    pass

Finally, if there is expected to be only one table in the file, it
might be simplest to just use
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.get_first_table`::

  table = votable.get_first_table()

Even easier, there is a convenience method to parse a VOTable file and
return the first table all in one step::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse_single_table
  table = parse_single_table("votable.xml")

From a `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` object, one can get the data itself
in the ``array`` member variable::

  data = table.array

This data is a Numpy record array.

The columns get their names from both the ``ID`` and ``name``
attributes of the ``FIELD`` elements in the ``VOTABLE`` file.  For
example, suppose we had a ``FIELD`` specified as follows:

.. code-block:: xml

   <FIELD ID="Dec" name="dec_targ" datatype="char" ucd="POS_EQ_DEC_MAIN"
          unit="deg">
    <DESCRIPTION>
     representing the ICRS declination of the center of the image.
    </DESCRIPTION>
   </FIELD>

.. note::

    The mapping from VOTable ``name`` and ``ID`` attributes to Numpy
    dtype ``names`` and ``titles`` is highly confusing.

    In VOTable, ``ID`` is guaranteed to be unique, but is not
    required. ``name`` is not guaranteed to be unique, but is
    required.

    In Numpy record dtypes, ``names`` are required to be unique and
    are required.  ``titles`` are not required, and are not required
    to be unique.

    Therefore, VOTable's ``ID`` most closely maps to Numpy's
    ``names``, and VOTable's ``name`` most closely maps to Numpy's
    ``titles``.  However, in some cases where a VOTable ``ID`` is not
    provided, a Numpy ``name`` will be generated based on the VOTable
    ``name``.  Unfortunately, VOTable fields do not have an attribute
    that is both unique and required, which would be the most
    convenient mechanism to uniquely identify a column.

This column of data can be extracted from the record array using::

  >>> table.array['dec_targ']
  array([17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.1516686826,
         17.1516686826, 17.1516686826, 17.1536197136, 17.1536197136,
         17.1536197136, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055,
         17.1553884541, 17.15539736932, 17.15539752176,
         17.25736014763,
         # ...
         17.2765703], dtype=object)

or equivalently::

  >>> table.array['Dec']
  array([17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.1516686826,
         17.1516686826, 17.1516686826, 17.1536197136, 17.1536197136,
         17.1536197136, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055,
         17.1553884541, 17.15539736932, 17.15539752176,
         17.25736014763,
         # ...
         17.2765703], dtype=object)

Building a new table from scratch
---------------------------------

It is also possible to build a new table, define some field datatypes
and populate it with data::

  from astropy.io.votable.tree import VOTableFile, Resource, Table, Field

  # Create a new VOTable file...
  votable = VOTableFile()

  # ...with one resource...
  resource = Resource()
  votable.resources.append(resource)

  # ... with one table
  table = Table(votable)
  resource.tables.append(table)

  # Define some fields
  table.fields.extend([
          Field(votable, name="filename", datatype="char", arraysize="*"),
          Field(votable, name="matrix", datatype="double", arraysize="2x2")])

  # Now, use those field definitions to create the numpy record arrays, with
  # the given number of rows
  table.create_arrays(2)

  # Now table.array can be filled with data
  table.array[0] = ('test1.xml', [[1, 0], [0, 1]])
  table.array[1] = ('test2.xml', [[0.5, 0.3], [0.2, 0.1]])

  # Now write the whole thing to a file.
  # Note, we have to use the top-level votable file object
  votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml")

Outputting a VOTable file
-------------------------

To save a VOTable file, simply call the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.to_xml` method.  It accepts
either a string or Unicode path, or a Python file-like object::

  votable.to_xml('output.xml')

There are a number of data storage formats supported by
`astropy.io.votable`.  The ``TABLEDATA`` format is XML-based and
stores values as strings representing numbers.  The ``BINARY`` format
is more compact, and stores numbers in base64-encoded binary.  VOTable
version 1.3 adds the ``BINARY2`` format, which allows for masking of
any data type, including integers and bit fields which can not be
masked in the older ``BINARY`` format.  The storage format can be set
on a per-table basis using the `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table.format`
attribute, or globally using the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.set_all_tables_format` method::

  votable.get_first_table().format = 'binary'
  votable.set_all_tables_format('binary')
  votable.to_xml('binary.xml')

Using `astropy.io.votable`
==========================

Standard compliance
-------------------

`astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` supports the `VOTable Format Definition
Version 1.1
<http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html>`_,
`Version 1.2
<http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/VOTable/20091130/REC-VOTable-1.2.html>`_,
and the `Version 1.3 proposed recommendation
<http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130315/PR-VOTable-1.3-20130315.html>`_.
Some flexibility is provided to support the 1.0 draft version and
other non-standard usage in the wild.  To support these cases, set the
keyword argument ``pedantic`` to ``False`` when parsing.

.. note::

  Each warning and VOTABLE-specific exception emitted has a number and
  is documented in more detail in :ref:`warnings` and
  :ref:`exceptions`.

Output always conforms to the 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 spec, depending on the
input.

.. _pedantic-mode:

Pedantic mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Many VOTABLE files in the wild do not conform to the VOTABLE
specification.  If reading one of these files causes exceptions, you
may turn off pedantic mode in `astropy.io.votable` by passing
``pedantic=False`` to the `~astropy.io.votable.parse` or
`~astropy.io.votable.parse_single_table` functions::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse
  votable = parse("votable.xml", pedantic=False)

Note, however, that it is good practice to report these errors to the
author of the application that generated the VOTABLE file to bring the
file into compliance with the specification.

Even with ``pedantic`` turned off, many warnings may still be omitted.
These warnings are all of the type
`~astropy.io.votable.exceptions.VOTableSpecWarning` and can be turned
off using the standard Python `warnings` module.

Missing values
--------------

Any value in the table may be "missing".  `astropy.io.votable` stores
a Numpy masked array in each `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table`
instance.  This behaves like an ordinary Numpy masked array, except
for variable-length fields.  For those fields, the datatype of the
column is "object" and another Numpy masked array is stored there.
Therefore, operations on variable length columns will not work -- this
is simply because variable length columns are not directly supported
by Numpy masked arrays.

Datatype mappings
-----------------

The datatype specified by a ``FIELD`` element is mapped to a Numpy
type according to the following table:

  ================================ ========================================================================
  VOTABLE type                     Numpy type
  ================================ ========================================================================
  boolean                          b1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  bit                              b1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unsignedByte                     u1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  char (*variable length*)         O - In Python 2.x, a `str` object; in 3.x, a ``bytes()`` object.
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  char (*fixed length*)            S
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unicodeChar (*variable length*)  O - In Python 2.x, a `unicode` object, in utf-16; in 3.x a `str` object
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unicodeChar (*fixed length*)     U
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  short                            i2
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  int                              i4
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  long                             i8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  float                            f4
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  double                           f8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  floatComplex                     c8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  doubleComplex                    c16
  ================================ ========================================================================

If the field is a fixed size array, the data is stored as a Numpy
fixed-size array.

If the field is a variable size array (that is ``arraysize`` contains
a '*'), the cell will contain a Python list of Numpy values.  Each
value may be either an array or scalar depending on the ``arraysize``
specifier.

Examining field types
---------------------

To look up more information about a field in a table, one can use the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table.get_field_by_id` method, which returns
the `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Field` object with the given ID.  For
example::

  >>> field = table.get_field_by_id('Dec')
  >>> field.datatype
  'char'
  >>> field.unit
  'deg'

.. note::
   Field descriptors should not be mutated.  To change the set of
   columns, convert the Table to an `astropy.table.Table`, make the
   changes, and then convert it back.

.. _votable-serialization:

Data serialization formats
--------------------------

VOTable supports a number of different serialization formats.

- `TABLEDATA
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC36>`__
  stores the data in pure XML, where the numerical values are written
  as human-readable strings.

- `BINARY
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC38>`__
  is a binary representation of the data, stored in the XML as an
  opaque ``base64``-encoded blob.

- `BINARY2
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC39>`__
  was added in VOTable 1.3, and is identical to "BINARY", except that
  it explicitly records the position of missing values rather than
  identifying them by a special value.

- `FITS
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC37>`__
  stores the data in an external FITS file.  This serialization is not
  supported by the `astropy.io.votable` writer, since it requires
  writing multiple files.

The serialization format can be selected in two ways:

    1) By setting the ``format`` attribute of a
    `astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` object::

        votable.get_first_table().format = "binary"
        votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml")

    2) By overriding the format of all tables using the
    ``tabledata_format`` keyword argument when writing out a VOTable
    file::

        votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml", tabledata_format="binary")

Converting to/from an `astropy.table.Table`
-------------------------------------------

The VOTable standard does not map conceptually to an
`astropy.table.Table`.  However, a single table within the ``VOTable``
file may be converted to and from an `astropy.table.Table`::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse_single_table
  table = parse_single_table("votable.xml").to_table()

As a convenience, there is also a function to create an entire VOTable
file with just a single table::

  from astropy.io.votable import from_table, writeto
  votable = from_table(table)
  writeto(votable, "output.xml")

.. note::

  By default, ``to_table`` will use the ``ID`` attribute from the files to
  create the column names for the `~astropy.table.Table` object.  However,
  it may be that you want to use the ``name`` attributes instead.  For this,
  set the ``use_names_over_ids`` keyword to `True`.  Note that since field
  ``names`` are not guaranteed to be unique in the VOTable specification,
  but column names are required to be unique in Numpy structured arrays (and
  thus `astropy.table.Table` objects), the names may be renamed by appending
  numbers to the end in some cases.

Performance considerations
--------------------------

File reads will be moderately faster if the ``TABLE`` element includes
an nrows_ attribute.  If the number of rows is not specified, the
record array must be resized repeatedly during load.

.. _nrows: http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html#ToC10

See Also
========

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.1
  <http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html>`_

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.2
  <http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/VOTable/20091130/REC-VOTable-1.2.html>`_

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.3, Proposed Recommendatation
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130315/PR-VOTable-1.3-20130315.html>`_


Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable
   :no-inheritance-diagram:
   :skip: VOWarning
   :skip: VOTableChangeWarning
   :skip: VOTableSpecWarning
   :skip: UnimplementedWarning
   :skip: IOWarning
   :skip: VOTableSpecError

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.tree
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.converters
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.ucd
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.util
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.validator
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.xmlutil
   :no-inheritance-diagram:


astropy.io.votable.exceptions Module
------------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   api_exceptions.rst

Commit message:

Fix #3621: Add note to docs about use_names_over_ids

docs/io/votable/index.rst, after:

.. doctest-skip-all

.. include:: references.txt

.. _astropy-io-votable:

*******************************************
VOTable XML handling (`astropy.io.votable`)
*******************************************

Introduction
============

The `astropy.io.votable` subpackage converts VOTable XML files to and
from Numpy record arrays.

Getting Started
===============

Reading a VOTable file
----------------------

To read in a VOTable file, pass a file path to
`~astropy.io.votable.parse`::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse
  votable = parse("votable.xml")

``votable`` is a `~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile` object, which
can be used to retrieve and manipulate the data and save it back out
to disk.

VOTable files are made up of nested ``RESOURCE`` elements, each of
which may contain one or more ``TABLE`` elements.  The ``TABLE``
elements contain the arrays of data.

To get at the ``TABLE`` elements, one can write a loop over the
resources in the ``VOTABLE`` file::

  for resource in votable.resources:
    for table in resource.tables:
      # ... do something with the table ...
      pass

However, if the nested structure of the resources is not important,
one can use `~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.iter_tables` to
return a flat list of all tables::

  for table in votable.iter_tables():
    # ... do something with the table ...
    pass

Finally, if there is expected to be only one table in the file, it
might be simplest to just use
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.get_first_table`::

  table = votable.get_first_table()

Even easier, there is a convenience method to parse a VOTable file and
return the first table all in one step::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse_single_table
  table = parse_single_table("votable.xml")

From a `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` object, one can get the data itself
in the ``array`` member variable::

  data = table.array

This data is a Numpy record array.

The columns get their names from both the ``ID`` and ``name``
attributes of the ``FIELD`` elements in the ``VOTABLE`` file.  For
example, suppose we had a ``FIELD`` specified as follows:

.. code-block:: xml

   <FIELD ID="Dec" name="dec_targ" datatype="char" ucd="POS_EQ_DEC_MAIN"
          unit="deg">
    <DESCRIPTION>
     representing the ICRS declination of the center of the image.
    </DESCRIPTION>
   </FIELD>

.. note::

    The mapping from VOTable ``name`` and ``ID`` attributes to Numpy
    dtype ``names`` and ``titles`` is highly confusing.

    In VOTable, ``ID`` is guaranteed to be unique, but is not
    required. ``name`` is not guaranteed to be unique, but is
    required.

    In Numpy record dtypes, ``names`` are required to be unique and
    are required.  ``titles`` are not required, and are not required
    to be unique.

    Therefore, VOTable's ``ID`` most closely maps to Numpy's
    ``names``, and VOTable's ``name`` most closely maps to Numpy's
    ``titles``.  However, in some cases where a VOTable ``ID`` is not
    provided, a Numpy ``name`` will be generated based on the VOTable
    ``name``.  Unfortunately, VOTable fields do not have an attribute
    that is both unique and required, which would be the most
    convenient mechanism to uniquely identify a column.

    When converting from a `astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` object to
    an `astropy.table.Table` object, one can specify whether to give
    preference to ``name`` or ``ID`` attributes when naming the
    columns.  By default, ``ID`` is given preference.  To give
    ``name`` preference, pass the keyword argument
    ``use_names_over_ids=True``::

      >>> votable.get_first_table().to_table(use_names_over_ids=True)

This column of data can be extracted from the record array using::

  >>> table.array['dec_targ']
  array([17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.1516686826,
         17.1516686826, 17.1516686826, 17.1536197136, 17.1536197136,
         17.1536197136, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055,
         17.1553884541, 17.15539736932, 17.15539752176,
         17.25736014763,
         # ...
         17.2765703], dtype=object)

or equivalently::

  >>> table.array['Dec']
  array([17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.15153360566, 17.1516686826,
         17.1516686826, 17.1516686826, 17.1536197136, 17.1536197136,
         17.1536197136, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055, 17.15375479055,
         17.1553884541, 17.15539736932, 17.15539752176,
         17.25736014763,
         # ...
         17.2765703], dtype=object)

Building a new table from scratch
---------------------------------

It is also possible to build a new table, define some field datatypes
and populate it with data::

  from astropy.io.votable.tree import VOTableFile, Resource, Table, Field

  # Create a new VOTable file...
  votable = VOTableFile()

  # ...with one resource...
  resource = Resource()
  votable.resources.append(resource)

  # ... with one table
  table = Table(votable)
  resource.tables.append(table)

  # Define some fields
  table.fields.extend([
          Field(votable, name="filename", datatype="char", arraysize="*"),
          Field(votable, name="matrix", datatype="double", arraysize="2x2")])

  # Now, use those field definitions to create the numpy record arrays, with
  # the given number of rows
  table.create_arrays(2)

  # Now table.array can be filled with data
  table.array[0] = ('test1.xml', [[1, 0], [0, 1]])
  table.array[1] = ('test2.xml', [[0.5, 0.3], [0.2, 0.1]])

  # Now write the whole thing to a file.
  # Note, we have to use the top-level votable file object
  votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml")

Outputting a VOTable file
-------------------------

To save a VOTable file, simply call the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.to_xml` method.  It accepts
either a string or Unicode path, or a Python file-like object::

  votable.to_xml('output.xml')

There are a number of data storage formats supported by
`astropy.io.votable`.  The ``TABLEDATA`` format is XML-based and
stores values as strings representing numbers.  The ``BINARY`` format
is more compact, and stores numbers in base64-encoded binary.  VOTable
version 1.3 adds the ``BINARY2`` format, which allows for masking of
any data type, including integers and bit fields which can not be
masked in the older ``BINARY`` format.  The storage format can be set
on a per-table basis using the `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table.format`
attribute, or globally using the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.VOTableFile.set_all_tables_format` method::

  votable.get_first_table().format = 'binary'
  votable.set_all_tables_format('binary')
  votable.to_xml('binary.xml')

Using `astropy.io.votable`
==========================

Standard compliance
-------------------

`astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` supports the `VOTable Format Definition
Version 1.1
<http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html>`_,
`Version 1.2
<http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/VOTable/20091130/REC-VOTable-1.2.html>`_,
and the `Version 1.3 proposed recommendation
<http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130315/PR-VOTable-1.3-20130315.html>`_.
Some flexibility is provided to support the 1.0 draft version and
other non-standard usage in the wild.  To support these cases, set the
keyword argument ``pedantic`` to ``False`` when parsing.

.. note::

  Each warning and VOTABLE-specific exception emitted has a number and
  is documented in more detail in :ref:`warnings` and
  :ref:`exceptions`.

Output always conforms to the 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 spec, depending on the
input.

.. _pedantic-mode:

Pedantic mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Many VOTABLE files in the wild do not conform to the VOTABLE
specification.  If reading one of these files causes exceptions, you
may turn off pedantic mode in `astropy.io.votable` by passing
``pedantic=False`` to the `~astropy.io.votable.parse` or
`~astropy.io.votable.parse_single_table` functions::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse
  votable = parse("votable.xml", pedantic=False)

Note, however, that it is good practice to report these errors to the
author of the application that generated the VOTABLE file to bring the
file into compliance with the specification.

Even with ``pedantic`` turned off, many warnings may still be omitted.
These warnings are all of the type
`~astropy.io.votable.exceptions.VOTableSpecWarning` and can be turned
off using the standard Python `warnings` module.

Missing values
--------------

Any value in the table may be "missing".  `astropy.io.votable` stores
a Numpy masked array in each `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table`
instance.  This behaves like an ordinary Numpy masked array, except
for variable-length fields.  For those fields, the datatype of the
column is "object" and another Numpy masked array is stored there.
Therefore, operations on variable length columns will not work -- this
is simply because variable length columns are not directly supported
by Numpy masked arrays.

Datatype mappings
-----------------

The datatype specified by a ``FIELD`` element is mapped to a Numpy
type according to the following table:

  ================================ ========================================================================
  VOTABLE type                     Numpy type
  ================================ ========================================================================
  boolean                          b1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  bit                              b1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unsignedByte                     u1
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  char (*variable length*)         O - In Python 2.x, a `str` object; in 3.x, a ``bytes()`` object.
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  char (*fixed length*)            S
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unicodeChar (*variable length*)  O - In Python 2.x, a `unicode` object, in utf-16; in 3.x a `str` object
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  unicodeChar (*fixed length*)     U
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  short                            i2
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  int                              i4
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  long                             i8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  float                            f4
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  double                           f8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  floatComplex                     c8
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  doubleComplex                    c16
  ================================ ========================================================================

If the field is a fixed size array, the data is stored as a Numpy
fixed-size array.

If the field is a variable size array (that is ``arraysize`` contains
a '*'), the cell will contain a Python list of Numpy values.  Each
value may be either an array or scalar depending on the ``arraysize``
specifier.

Examining field types
---------------------

To look up more information about a field in a table, one can use the
`~astropy.io.votable.tree.Table.get_field_by_id` method, which returns
the `~astropy.io.votable.tree.Field` object with the given ID.  For
example::

  >>> field = table.get_field_by_id('Dec')
  >>> field.datatype
  'char'
  >>> field.unit
  'deg'

.. note::
   Field descriptors should not be mutated.  To change the set of
   columns, convert the Table to an `astropy.table.Table`, make the
   changes, and then convert it back.

.. _votable-serialization:

Data serialization formats
--------------------------

VOTable supports a number of different serialization formats.

- `TABLEDATA
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC36>`__
  stores the data in pure XML, where the numerical values are written
  as human-readable strings.

- `BINARY
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC38>`__
  is a binary representation of the data, stored in the XML as an
  opaque ``base64``-encoded blob.

- `BINARY2
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC39>`__
  was added in VOTable 1.3, and is identical to "BINARY", except that
  it explicitly records the position of missing values rather than
  identifying them by a special value.

- `FITS
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130920/REC-VOTable-1.3-20130920.html#ToC37>`__
  stores the data in an external FITS file.  This serialization is not
  supported by the `astropy.io.votable` writer, since it requires
  writing multiple files.

The serialization format can be selected in two ways:

    1) By setting the ``format`` attribute of a
    `astropy.io.votable.tree.Table` object::

        votable.get_first_table().format = "binary"
        votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml")

    2) By overriding the format of all tables using the
    ``tabledata_format`` keyword argument when writing out a VOTable
    file::

        votable.to_xml("new_votable.xml", tabledata_format="binary")

Converting to/from an `astropy.table.Table`
-------------------------------------------

The VOTable standard does not map conceptually to an
`astropy.table.Table`.  However, a single table within the ``VOTable``
file may be converted to and from an `astropy.table.Table`::

  from astropy.io.votable import parse_single_table
  table = parse_single_table("votable.xml").to_table()

As a convenience, there is also a function to create an entire VOTable
file with just a single table::

  from astropy.io.votable import from_table, writeto
  votable = from_table(table)
  writeto(votable, "output.xml")

.. note::

  By default, ``to_table`` will use the ``ID`` attribute from the files to
  create the column names for the `~astropy.table.Table` object.  However,
  it may be that you want to use the ``name`` attributes instead.  For this,
  set the ``use_names_over_ids`` keyword to `True`.  Note that since field
  ``names`` are not guaranteed to be unique in the VOTable specification,
  but column names are required to be unique in Numpy structured arrays (and
  thus `astropy.table.Table` objects), the names may be renamed by appending
  numbers to the end in some cases.

Performance considerations
--------------------------

File reads will be moderately faster if the ``TABLE`` element includes
an nrows_ attribute.  If the number of rows is not specified, the
record array must be resized repeatedly during load.

.. _nrows: http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html#ToC10

See Also
========

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.1
  <http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/REC/VOTable/VOTable-20040811.html>`_

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.2
  <http://www.ivoa.net/Documents/VOTable/20091130/REC-VOTable-1.2.html>`_

- `VOTable Format Definition Version 1.3, Proposed Recommendatation
  <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/VOTable/20130315/PR-VOTable-1.3-20130315.html>`_


Reference/API
=============

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable
   :no-inheritance-diagram:
   :skip: VOWarning
   :skip: VOTableChangeWarning
   :skip: VOTableSpecWarning
   :skip: UnimplementedWarning
   :skip: IOWarning
   :skip: VOTableSpecError

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.tree
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.converters
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.ucd
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.util
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.validator
   :no-inheritance-diagram:

.. automodapi:: astropy.io.votable.xmlutil
   :no-inheritance-diagram:


astropy.io.votable.exceptions Module
------------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   api_exceptions.rst
